===== PAGE 001 =====
Thursday Peoria Ill. April 5th 1849
Journal of a Trip From Peoria Ill. to California
en the Pacific
By Jonn R. Forsyth
Apr 5 Started with a waggon and 4 yoke of oxen and two
drivers namely Gideon Farrow & Obediah Oakely after
packing our waggon and bidding adieu to my Dear Wife
and Children we Started for the Far West the day was
pleasant but the roads were literally to the hub it
was no figurative expression for worse roads Were never
traversed by wheeled carriages. Some times we had to
put on as many as Hight yoke (be it known that there
were Five Waggons in our Company) nowever we with great
Exertion made 14 miles and encamped on the open prairie
6 at Saml,McFaddens - night very wet and all the next day
gay it rained incessantly and only made about 6 miles
through the most horrible roads that it was possible to
imagine, ;
7 on the 7th the rain still continued and nothing but
the golden Dreams of the Far El Dorado gave us courage
to proceed, often & often the thoughts of our happy
homes would force themselves on our minds and make us
wish we were with‘our Dear Wives & Children who no doubt
felt equally Solidious respecting us. at night we gener-
ally made a large Camp fire and round its blazing and
cheerful light forgot part of the fatigues of the day -
8 the next day being Sunday we let our wearied cattle
rest and it being also a continued rain, we began to
. still feel more discouraged in fact so much so that one
of the waggons returned back. I hoped for better weather
and determined to proceed for better consolation I took
out a new Bible presented to me by my Friend Mrs, Margaret
Harrison & read a few chapters. i felt better.
9 we started this morning and if possible found a
worse road, we could barely move and proceeded with great
difficulty, the country is beautiful with fine Farms but
were in no frame of mind to give them the admiration they
deserved we lived well having a good supply of good boiled
Ham which we had brought from home and with a Slice of
Bread and a Cup of Strong Coffee continued at night round
our cheerful Camp Fire to enjoy ourselves we then retired
to our waggons & slept sound until awoke by the cheerful
song of the Robin Thrush & Blue Bird.
10 this day was dry and pleasant & we forgot all our
previous wettings & pitied the poor fellows who had not
/ perseverance to proceed and we looked forward with high
anticipation to the beautiful plains where we would have
: dry footing, Buffalo hunting and all the wild excitements
“of Praire life, however towards noon on crossing a large
Prairie we met 2 waggons returning who gave us wonderful
accounts of Bad roads,Swollen rivers oroken down Briuges
and that the so many thousands were now on their way that

===== PAGE 002 =====
1849 Broken Horn - California Wagons - Swollen Creeks -
Page 2
Apr. 10 there would be no grass for one third of the cattle that
was going, that we could not possibly get ferried at the
Mississippi short of a month all of which however was
not Sufficient to damp our courage and we bade them good
by & proceeded on our way (but not like Christians rejoicing)

ll this day also continued tolerably dry only odaséi ona if
shotf% and at night campd on a beautiful creek where we
had plenty of good wood, during the day crossed 4 large
prairie and seen great numbers of Prairie Hens. conse-
quently at night our supper was varied with a fine Stew,

12 day cold Stormy with ocagsional shoWFs and towards
night camp'd early on a small creek, it rained heavy all
night and when morning appeared we had the misfortune to
discover that one of our leaders had brokevhis Horn off
during the night. it was a pitiaole sight to see the
poor mangled and bleeding animal who nad so gallantly and
gay,been our best ox during this our first essay to the
far west and who had boldly braved the deep slots, miry
roads & Swollen Streams. however we had to place him in
his usual post, after putting tar and a cloth over it.
we had only proceeded a short distance on the morning of
the llth when we came to Camp Creek where the first real
sight of wnat we might expect on a larger scale met our
view, about 20 California Waggons all encamped on the
creek, as it was not out of its banks by last nights rain
a number of men busy constructing a Bridge gave animation
to the scene. By noon a Temporary Bridge was constructed
for the narrow wheel waggons, and before sun set about
Eight waggons had crossed but as the stream was falling
rapidly we concluded to wait untill morning , it was a
curious sight+here were women washing, children playing,

& some cooking, others, shooting at the mark, Oxen,
Feeding around. Dogs Barking, etc.

14 last night was very cold with a heavy frost. we made
an early start and crossed the creek Belly deep. then over
a fine prairie to a log cabNin were we met an old Tergme-
gant who had Corn for Sale at 207 per Bus. had to buy 15
Bus. Couldn't steal Eggs As usual she kept 4 strict
watch, Soon arrived at the Father of Waters, swo lt to his
utmost neight. cane to Pointasoouc & then 4 miles down
the river to some name I don't mind opposite to Fort Madi-
son where we seen about 30 waggons like ourselves all
bound for the gold regions and as the Boat only crossed 5
times Each day we had to wait untill almost dark however
after considerable trouble we all crossed safe and en-
camped at the lower end of town.

15 and on 15th we were visited by numbers of well dressed
men who I nave no doubt pitied the poor Californians when
they looked at our dirty and travail worn appearance never
once thinking that "We were gentlemen in disguise" As the
night was very cold with a heavy frost and the day appeared
the same we "Hitched up" and drove 8 miles to a small run
and Encamped on a Beautiful timbered Bottom where we spent
the night

===== PAGE 003 =====
1849 April 1849 - Crossing the Des Moines, Cholera - Page 3

Apr. 16 And on Monday 16 continued on for about 8 miles when we
camped on the edge of a large prairie the day was lowting
and some little snow fell, but our camp dinner was enlivened
with a fine pudding made by Mr, Oakly from our old Bread,

It was really delicious and hunger gave Excellent sauce, At
night our Boys returned from a Small Shooting pout around the
camp and brought in sufficient Rabbits to give us a good
supper.

17 Heavy Rain the most of the night and a cold windy morn-
ing with a severe snow Storm consequently every thing looked
rather gloomy and add to 411 we had a large and bleak prairie
to cross to the Des Moines and a colder day I think I hardly
ever felt. We got to the war like City of "Bonaparte" on
the Des Moines at dark and encamp'd at the Ferny and

18 on Wednesday 18 commenced crossing this rapid river and
after 3 wagons & oxen had cross'd the Boat on ner return
filled & sunk however all tae men saved themselves in the
Skiff and by suncset the Boat was back at her old ground &
ready to resume Business & by dark we had all crossed in
safety-- I occupied the day in Fishing with pretty good

: success 1 Bass 10 Cat Fish.

19 Cold frosty night but clear Windy day and from this
time forward untill 15th of May wnen we finally arrived in
the Indian Country I-rote my Journal in letters to Mrs.
Forsyth the reasons of the sepdMration of the Peoria Pioneers
it is here unnecessary to mention suffice it to say that on
the passage up the river Mr. Crandell got acquainted with
various Saint Fe-ans and by them was persuaded to change the
first contemplated routé by way of St Joseph through the
Northern route to California - to Independence via Santa Fe
and after various changes turnings wendings etc we found our-
selves (that's about one half of the original number of
Peoria Pioneers) at Fort Ldvenworth --

May 13 ~ where all was bustle & hubbub as government was filling
out some larger trains for Santa Fe every field & pasture
was filled with Mules Oxen Tents etc, Officers ordering men
swearing soldiers in all sorts of style Standing lying etc
Such confusion I have never witnessed but probably my un-
acustomed vision to such sights made it appear so wnen un-
doubtedly the Commander could bring order out of confusion--
the situation is truly deligtful and the surrounding coun~
try charmingly diversified witn Hills & Plains,iood and
water and all the varieties of scenery to Sharm the serfiies,

14 left Fort Leavensworth and proceeded through an interest-
ing Indian country and camp'd 9 miles out on a small creek
where we remiAned one day waiting on Mess. Rankin ete as the
Cnolera was raging in town and numbers of the soldiers were
attacked with it. all the surrounding hills were covered
with tents of tne invalidws and now a number of tne Emigrants
were attacked with this fearful disease; adjoining our en-
campment was another where one of them died this day and :
three more were laying Sick.in fact in our own SAimll Co. we
could scarcely say that half were quite well all felt the
presence of this fell destroyer - absence from home & friends,
want of sufficient medical aid etc. all combined to deoress our

===== PAGE 004 =====
1849 Stampeding Mules - Fear of the Indians for Gno le ra Pg. 4

May 14 Spirits waich the Scenery of the Surrounding Country could not
entirely remove, however on the evening after our encampment
we were much amused with Mr. Reese (who had been down at the
Fort) rushing into Camp at full gallop with two mules in ad-
vance which ne had stampeded - in fact we considered the Ind- :
ians were on us and rushed to Arms but his well Knowlyell
soon relieved us from our fears but alas all his spoils had
vanished in the morning no mules in view but still he was
not willing to thus loWse his first Trophies from tae Indians
and round he went praying from Hill to Hill but no Kindred
response answered his anxious brays They were gone whether
stolen or recovered by their rightful owners was never Known
probably like the little Fish they went on tneir own Hook -~
about nine miles. .

15 This day we waited for our Peoria friends to come up
who arrived towards Evening all in good health, we spent the
day in viewing the surrounding country which was beautifully
dgversified. round large Hills covered with the richest ver-
dure a Creek of pure clear water Swept round the base of our
wearied oxen all placed in the most picturesque positions
rendered our situation one which would have pleased a Landscape
painter --

16 we got off in good style and presented a pleasing appear-
ance as We swept round the Hill with our White Covered Wagons
and long trains of oxen - in about a mile we ascended a high
Hill which gave us 4 most magnificent view. we could see the
Missouri Hills in the distance and from our elevated situation
all the surrounding country for twenty or thirty miles; the
prospect was fine and add to all we could see a train of gover!
ment Wagons in the distance at least three Miles long winding
their slow length at this time large trains were preparing
for Santa Fe and all the Roads were crowded. during the day
we passed some Indian dwellings which were very respectable:
log Houses and their farm generally enclosing a Field of
about Eight or Ten Acres which had generally been in corn.
at present however nearly all the houses were deserted on
account of the number of Emigrants and the fear which was
spread by the Cholera Whenever we approached a House that
was inhabited the inmates fled as if we had been the destroy-
ing Angel and probably they were right in shunning our pres-
ence as the White Man has generally been the bane and scourge
of their race. I have seen the Indian Woman gallop off full
flight mounted with two or three papoosies behind them (on
our approach) the warriors were in the Plains Hunting and
our intercourse was of course very limited, 14 m,

17 We arrived at the Kansas River and crossed at a good
Ferry established by the government, the water was about
250 yds wide; we ferried the wagon & Swam the cattle cost
each wagon about one & quarter doll, and continued about 3
miles to a fine prairie where we camped at an Indian Settle-
ment of good Houses and Farms the man near whose House we
slept was a regular Caurch memoer and his Children attended
School, 20 m.

===== PAGE 005 =====
1849 Description of Indian Country - Death of John Page 5
Bowers - Back Jack Grove -

May 18 We now reached the large and Boundless prairie the
vision strained in vain for Timber with the exception of a
few Scattered Trees on small runs we now began really for
the first time to be aware that we were in the Indian Terri-
tory, immense plains extended on all sides everything de-
noted that we were now approaching the country of the Indian,
the Buffalo, the elk etc as numerous herds of the last were
passed near the Road. previous to our leaving the Road lead-
ing to. the South Pass hundreds of Wagons were on every side
of us but when we struck into the Santa Fe trail tae number
considerably diminished still hundregds were on the Road.
to try and form the least Idea of the multitudes bound on
this gold digging excursion would be utterly impossible.

Some times a train of one or Two hundred Mules with Pack,
saddles, Boxes, Sales and all the parAphranalia of an outrfit
would pass us. onwards a loaded mule would run then Stop
eat a mouthful of Grass untile one of the drivers came up
when the Grack of his whip whould once more make him move
forward. it Kept up a continued excitement. Mexicans Ind-
ians,half Breeds, Negroes,W/hites etc made up 4 wost motley
assembly - taken into consideration, hundreds of loaded wagon,
“ight to Sixteen oxen each. Surely never man expected to see
Such Sights in an Indian Country - Every fellow armed to the
Teeth “iffle,Pistols Bowie Kaives,Dirks etc ornamented his
Body jon ais head a large slouch Hat, his Beard etc as long as
nis Bowie Knife all combined to render the day a memorable
one. at night we encamped in Black Jack Grove - if a few
stunted Trees can be called a grove. 18 miles.

19 Saturday Morning Black Jack. Grove. we remained here all
day owing to the Illness of Joan Bowers who continued worse -
We sent forward three of our men to see Mr. Kirker and Company
and make arrangements for our future progress. the day was
story & lowring - done some washing etc.

20 - Sunday - our men returned from Kirkers company said they
were most hospitably entertained - and in general very well
pleased, on their return they found a man who had fallen off
his Horse sick With Cholera, two men who were passing with
a mule Train Stop'd to render him what assistance was in their
power but it was storming most awfully at the time--Mr Bowers
still very Sick--Dr Roverts of the Springfield Co. came into
camp - took dinner & stay'd all night - Severe rain & thunder
took Some medicine as I had been unwell for the past week with
Diarrhea ~- great difficulty in keeping our cattle near camp
owing to the Thunder & Rain -

21 this morning John Bowers died in his tent at 6 o'clock
& a little after 8 o'clock we burried the poor Fellow in his
Blankett in a very nice cAve at the foot of a Black Jack Oak
Tree & cut his name on the Same. it was really a solemn
business and we all gave a last melancholy look on the face
of our fellow traveller and "bitterly thought on tne morrow"
but “let not a monument give you or me hopes for not a pinch
of dust remains of Cheops" we then yoked up and left this
melancholy Encampment and had not proceeded more than 6 miles
waen we found a few men busy interring the man whom our
friends had seen yesterday. he had been attended by the two

===== PAGE 006 =====
1849 Death from Cholera - Osage River- Dead Oxen ~ Page 6
Hunt - Wild Onions - Wet Night -
, ce Strangers until® ne had died when they left him wrap'd up in
/ his Blanket and left a written paper stating that having no
Spades etc to make his grave they left the corpse to be buried
. by the first traveler wno possessed the means, and that they
: had taken his baggage to Council Grove where it would be left
for his relatives, I think his name was McKeoiski of Utica,
: Mo - poor fellow he is just in a hole by the road Side-- at
evening we encamped on a most magnific&nt Elevation where we
could see about 10 miles on each side, 15 m.
: May 22 day Showry & cool, saw four Indians two large Indian
; trails crossed over our camping ground they approached from
. . the West & North. the day was cool our view very extended.

: during the day we passed three new graves of the emigrants to-
wards noon cross 110 mile Greek or Osage River it was Glear
and but a small stream to what we had expected. at evening we
camp'd on another Creek much larger on a fine slo&ping prairie.
the creek was well timbered, heavy rain during the night
Creek call'd Bridge Creek, We had some good singing round
our Camp fire and retired in rather better humor than our

’ versatile leader generally indulged in,as nis Eccentricities
in most cases are anything but amusing. during the day we
passed immense numbers of Skeletons of Dead Oxen government
having about one thousand Froge to death here last winter
Some places thirty would lfe in one pile. passed two encampe-
ments of emigrants of about one hundred men each taey were

‘ looking after stray'd oxen - 20 miles.

25 day cool and roads somewhat heavy after last nighis
heavy rain. Country Hilly & Streams plenty. Strawberries
now getting ripe and on tne banks of Streams plenty. Oactus
numerous on the Sand Stone Hills. 25 miles.

24 last night Mr. Tart & 1 stood the mornings guard for
the first time. our watch came on at 3 o'clock the morn-
ing was cool and very heavy dew it had rained the early part
of the evening, Waoen going my rounds I thought of the Dear

. ones at home and fondly hoped their sleep was sound and sweet.

here I was for the first time Keeping guard over our sleep~
ing camp in an Indian Country our Counter sign was Peoria
I was much amused when meeting Mr. Tart as 1 pretended to
take him for an Indian and demanded the counter sign he had

. but imperfectly heard it on the previous evening and I immed-
jately cock'd pistol and was preparing to shoot wnen he thought
of the "Beautiful City" and thus for tne first night no scalps

: were lost - Yesterday evening the Boys who were mounted had
a, good run after a Wolf but he took to broken ground and easily
excaped. game very scarce. some few plover are nearly all
we gee. * generally get a few every day-~-Wild Onions - any
quailty generally cook a few once a day. passed an Indian
Village of about 70 Wigwams, but deserted,and appeared to be
so for the last 8 months an awful thunder Storm this evening
with torrents of cold rain in fact all the ground was covered
with water two incnes deep i had to Greep into the wagon and
wet to the skin,wrap'd a Blanket round me,and passed the night
as well as I could which certainly was none of the pleasAntest
it was impossible to pitch our tent and if pitched we could not

===== PAGE 007 =====
i . .
1849 Kaw Indian Village - Camped at Gouncil Grove + VPage 7
. . Indians -
have lain in it Such Storm I had not before witnessed but
morning Came cold & lowering but a warm cup of Coffee Set all
to rignts, we had considerable difficulty in Keeping our oxen
: within bounds as the Storm frightened them 25 miles

May 25 Friday Morning within one & half mile of Council Grove.

: after a cloudy cold morning the day began to clear up. Some
Indians Came into camp & I learned there was an Indian Village
of Kaws within 14 miles of our Encampment - off three of us :
started and in a Short time we met Six warriors on the trail
they made signs to disuade us from Visiting them but I was de-

‘ termined to see all that was to be seen and passed by those
Braves & soon met a small boy I presented him witha piece of
Bread & ten cent piece + found I had made a friend. we soon

/ entered the VillXage and were saluted by mongrel puppy Whelp
& Hound & cur of low degree in thousands. Nep looked on them
with perfect contempt. Tne naked Children ran and hid, in
fact we put the whole Vill&ge in Commotion. I entered one of
their double Wigwams it had two fires and I think two families
at each fire. the men were sitting nearly naked round the
fires. the women busy swing cooking or nursing. One of the
Women held up her Papoosie for me to admire I certainly ad-
mired the Board it was tied to and I suppose the mother thouzht
that it was the little red Skin which pleased me. the Cradle
or Board was beautifully painted and ornamented and roynd the
little saviyes head was about one hundred small Hawk Belle
which made a Continued Yingling. I presented it with a pair
of small socks, and after that I certainly stood high in the
mothers estimation at least. they appeared well fed but were
most perservering Beggars. their Wigwams were good mostly
Fifty feet long and about twenty Wide - Eight or Nine feet
high in the center. made of bark & poles but Sug iokently
strong to resist any storm I traded for some Moccasons I
gave them musicK in the shape of a Jews Harp which pleased
them much, I could not trade for a Horse altho they had plenty
of them. A Warrior had died the day before and they Burxied
him with all ais finery and shot nis horse at the Grave; a
Beautiful Cream colored one, I would have been glad to have
obtained him but bis relatives thought he would need him in
the beautiful hunting Grounds appropriated to good Indians -
Gapt Kirker was encamp'd nere with his company of about Forty
men , we will organize Tomorrow or next day - this day was Sept
dry for a Wonder ~ 134 miles to G. Grove,

May 26 day fine, Surrounded by Indians, men,Squaws & “apoosies
all vedi ng. the men for Some Whisky & Tobac, the squaws almost
any thing, even ais majesty tae Chief condecended to ask ine ,
for a Pickayune which complied with in shape of a ten cent
piece and consequently became his Amigo & he mine, Five gal-
lons of whisky would buy one of their Sixty Dollar Horses.
they are excellant Horsemen & kept Galloping around us and
over the plains all day. it was certainly picturesque to see
the Braves Sweeping round on their Horses in their Red Blankets,
one Eye painted Red,another Black or Blue, the nose a bright
vermilion. long feathers in their scalp lock,Bow & arrows.

===== PAGE 008 =====
/ 1849 Leave Council Grove ~ first Antelope - First Page 8
Gapt Rogers - Trains - Gotton)Mood Creek -

May 26 Bridle covered with small Bells. Horses Tail plaited full of
Riténs Feathers. a Gun across in saddle Bow, Belts of wam-
pum Leyings covered with beads & Bells & thousands of nameless
ornaments help'd to decorate those nomgdes of the Western

: Prairies, the day was fine and we spent it in real pleasure as
we intended to remain here two or three days and repack our
Wagons & wash our cloths.
: 27 Sunday we spent in our Beautiful camping grounds surround-
ed by Indians trading for moccasons etc. and they certainly
: show great tact in making a Bargain, about 25¢ was the usual
price for a pair - the day lovely & pleasant.

28 Started on our Way to Bents Fort about Twenty Eight wagons
of us got off early had breakfast before sun rise. before
long our train amounted to ugOwards of Forty wagons. not yet
organized. Shortly after leaving Council Grove we discovered
Five Antelopes they was the first we had seen of those Grace-
ful animals and their fast speed left our best horsemen far be-
nind but they were wet on so many different points that they ,
seemed to get bewildered and one time in rounding 4 small hill
I came within two hundreds yards of them, I hunted Nep on them
who started after them with great vigor & no doubt he thought
them Either Pork or Mutton & that ne would soon have them by
the haunch but alas poor Nep soon returned much crest fallen,
finding himself left so far in the rear, two were shot during

- the day - this evening Capt Phillips came into camp, his wag-
on with a company of fourteen being in the rear of about 15
miles-day fine - camp'd near Diamond Spring 20 m, :

29 Morning pleasant early Start. at noon we came up with
Capt, Rogers teams,about eleven o'clock & joined in with him.

We have now 26 good ox teams & we organized a company by call-
ing J, CG. Armstrong to the Chair & Myself Secretary - Capt
Rogers was unanimously chosen for Capt of the "Ox Train Pio-
neers" we then pursued our Journey to within four miles of
-Gottonwood Creek and camp'd on Some ponds of water (no running
: Water) no wood, but being aware of tais we had carried some
along. We this day passed over a boundless Prairie, no timber
in View Some three hundred pack mules passed us, generally
one man to three mules. the head of one mule to the tail of
another in strings of nine. it was certainly a droll sight
to see the Bales,Boxes,Saddles,Saddle Bags,spades etc bobbing
up & down, 25 miles. , :

30 camp'd- within six miles of GottorCwood creek. at night
Smith Phillips came into camp at dark. Said his Father's Wagon
was coming on benind‘sfour of us armed to the Teeth rode back
& avout 12 o'clock escorted him safe into camp - the morning
was very wet and we Stop't on Cotton Wood Greek during the. day
a meeting Was called. I was chairman & Mr, John Rankin, Secty
Dr. Rogers of Ill.was Blected Capt. Capt Phillips.ist Lieut -
we elected two more Lieuts', four Sergts Wagon masters and the
Cessment was made for Guide (Cap Kirker) $3.25 each man, we
Collected about nalf of our assessment, I stood on first
Guard at night it was cold & Snory 6 wiles

31 Started very early. day quit® cold but dry over coats
in great demand, Country Beautiful, View unbounded, Carried

===== PAGE 009 =====
/ .
1849 . Page 9
May 31 timber with us for cooking purposes ~ Antelope very plenty
one Killed in our mess - plover numerous & tame ~- in Gotton
Wood creek we caught some small sun Fish & Gat - numerous
‘ trains both oxen & mules all in one string to day it was at
least Six miles long at one time, As far as we could gener-
ally have a fair View the road was covered with wagons, pack
mules etc. another Antelope Killed it was a fine Doe & had
two Small horns growing out straight over the eyes; it was
the most singular place for Horns to grow Ll ever Saw, their
length seven inches, color a light fawn. size not quite as
large as a full grown Deer. camp'd on a muddy pond, no
wood but had some with us & water bad 38 miles
Jane 1 a memorable day, a day to be recollected in the Sporting
world of which we were the center - ag we had camp'd on Big
Turkey Sreek (if a few muddy ponds deserved the name) about
12 miles from the Little Arkansas and three large companies
all camp'd at Same place our Capt proposed an early start so
that we would ve first at the Ford, we got up at 2 o'clock &
a little after 3 we were all under way - Just as the sun was
rising some one hollowed out Buffalo & sure enough
there were the Shaggy monsters for 3 or Four miles the plain was
covered with tnem - then every Fellow who could command a horse
Was soon in the saddle, RifSle in hand and Pistols in Belt &
such 4 scampering as then took place, in a Short time they
were up & amongst them & then the chase began in earnest every
one firing bang,bang. ina Short time Seven were lying flat on
the Green & four or five cftéves, in fact every horse that
would Stand to be packed on was loaded with the most tender &
juicy parts and such Swallowing of Buffalo Meat never took
place by the same number of men. TI really thought we would
never quit cooking Hump, tongues, & tender loins, & calves
Livers soon disappeared. it ig said the man does not Know
what good living is who has never ate a canvass back Duck, bub
the American may well be proud of hig country when it produces
such an exquisite delicacy as “Buffalo Hump" oh! ye Gourmares
of Paris with your Turkey Stuffed with Trguffles, the nectér
/ of the Gods or all that the most vivid infacination can cone
ceive are unworthy one single passing thought, no, I would
, rather be one of the nomads of this Western Wilderness &
occasionally dine on "Buffalo Hump" than an Alderman of London
& daily nave my Turtle soup. Who would talk of Warriors,
Statesman or Poets, Emperors, Kings or Princes when the most
exquisite delicacies the world can afford here lies within
the grasp of the man of Steady nerve and true eye. As for the
danger attending the Chase, it is entirely lost sight of in the
excitement of the moment. no man who has not witnessed it can
form the most distant Idea to what length their feelings
can be carried. in fact the old Horses who comex into camp
with drooping head & scarcely able to Keep time with our
oX train now pricks up Ears & tail,gives a few quick Short
gnorts as the thundering nerd pass along, and soon carries his
excited master into their midst - for it is an eronious Idea
that it requires a very fast horse to overtake them. the most
of our contin horses will run them down in half an nour or less.
The glories of this first day of June waa consumated by the

===== PAGE 010 =====
1849 Page 10

June 1 Slaughter of Sixteen head of Buffalo. one Calf was brought in-
to camp by Capt Rogers alive & Well & the next morning it suck-
ed one of our milk cows & was as tame as our domestic calves
but having no way of bringing it along we were compelled to
leave it to the tender mercies of the Wolves, & I have no doubt
some few of them had a good veal Breakfast Shortly, after our
departure as hundreds of the hungry sneaking rascals were just
waiting to see us safe out of Riffle reach, thé poor calif I
regretted much to leave it as it had become yuite tame and
would follow any of us all roung the camp - but we had to
leave it to it's fate we camp'd on the little Arkansafs, a
very small stream at this place 14 miles,

June 2 I find this morning that during the great hunt of yester-
day numbers of the men got thrown off their horses but all
were recovered,but one belonging to a Mr. Sampson, who started
off with a large nerd of Buffalo, and no doubt is now Enjoying
his full liberty on those Boundless prairies but when he joins
a herd of mustangs with his Saddle,Bridle Holster & Pistol (if
they remain on him) no doubt Be will, be elected Chief owing to
his numerous weapons of defe ipe & agfession, no doubt if taken
by either 2 roving band of the Gxmanchée or Pawnee with all
his prépiirxna lia on him he will be a rich prize - this day
the Buffalo & Antelope were very plenty but as the ardour of
the first excited feeling had somewnat abated this day the
slaughter was not so great. J took a hunt with Mr, Nash. we
went out in the evening. he on a fine Blood Mare & IT mounted
on James Hankin's mule. I-found I possessed sufficient speed
but she would by no means associate with such doubtful looking
company. Mr, Nash Killed a large bull the first shot he fell
within a few nundred yards of where he received tne fatal Ball
we then commenced and loaded our animals with the best parts, &
got into camp a little after dark where considerable alarm had
been spread owing to our protracted absence. a herd of about
one hundred Blk were seen today, none Shot. the Country lying
between the little Arkansaws and Cow creek is a fine undulat-
ing Prairie, almost a plain. distance about 18 miles, plenty
of Water in Cow creek but little good wood, we Jerked part of-
our Buffalo meat this night... daY clear & warm, 20 miles.

June 3 Sunday Morning. clear, & dry, woen I got out of my tent,
Thousands of Buffalo in all directions , the plains dotted with
them, in this clear pure atmosphere taey can be distinguished
at a great distance and wnat only appears distant about one
or two miles will probably ve five or six ~- Yesterday one of
our men,a Mr, Barton,Shot nimself in the shoulder in his
eagerness to catch a young Antelope which he had run down, the
gun in some way slipped and the Ball passed clean through and
was caught in his coat - a dog town was within about one mile
of our Camp & as we rested our oxen today 1 paid the small &
numerous gentlemen a visit I was saluted by a continued little
Barking,something like a small Fyst,but as I advanced they
popped into their subbetanean houses & disappeared, but their
curiosity got the better of their Fears & they soon showed
their little round heads above the mouth of their hole & once
more set up their little quick bark I remained perfectly still

===== PAGE 011 =====
1849 Page ll
June 3 & they soon rejoined their gambols, but I must say that their
distinguished Chief Kept out of my sight or at least I did
not discover anyone whom I thought ought to be put forward
in that capacity. there certainly was a difference in size
put that I attributed to Age & a good constitution, they are
certainly an interesting Community of sleek Fat & amusing
little animals. the grass all through their village is short
& close unlike the rest of the Prairie. it is generaly a
loamy sandy ground and I could see no water with which they
could at any time avail themselves. our men shot 4 great num-
ber but obtained only a few as they generally fell back into
their holes & some supposed the dead were drawn back by their
living friends, for that I cant say - I saw some few owls
amongst tnoem & not a few Rattle snakes - it is a curious
association - Innocence, “isdom, sublety Eve in Paradise.
Minervas associate & tne serpynt.
4 Mionday Morning Early start off at 5 o'clock I stood
the middle watch last night & as there had been a Buffalo
Killed within half a mile of camp the previous day, such 4
concert of Wolves over the remains I never heard it was one
continued yelling Fignting & howling no cessation untilz
morning, as this is the hunting country of the Kaws, Pawnees
& Cammanchees « they are now out hunting of Course all the
Wolves are congregated in the debatable country. we had a
meeting last evening & the rules read to have an advance &
Rear guard during the day & no strolling from the wagons, 4
company to be detailed every day for duty Hunting de ~ this
: day we drove 24 miles to Walnut Creek at one place we came
on a bend of the Arkansas it is a large muddy stream at this
place passed numerous Dog towns, Seen Herds of Buffalo, on
the lst days sport, some of the Boys said they seen five
thousands ,some ten,sowe Twenty & some Fifty Thousand, in
such disparity of numbers truth might lye between. in fact
they are more numerous than I had any Idea of. on yesterday
morning as all our men were pretty tired they slept long,
and I got up and cooked my own Breakfast it only consisted
of a nice piece of Buffalo Hump & some excellent Fresh Butter —
which I got from my Friend Mr, Miller, good cream for my
coffee a little cheese etc, you may say a man could subsist
for some time on such fare wauen all is accompanied by the
purest of Air - a clear delightful atmosphere& the prospect
of an exciting days chase before you. we drove to Walnut
Creek distance about 24 miles and remained here all day Tues.
June 5 on a/c of the Wound Mr, Barton had recd - as the Doctor
thought it would not be safe to move him, & here we wrote
some letters & look to Chance if our Friends in the States
ever receive them. on last Friday we passed a new Grave &
“letters for the States underneath, please take them along
& pat into the P.O. so I think it rather problematical if
our Friends will be much benefited by our correspondence.
: our hunters returned towards evening naving Killed two Buffalo
& loaded down with meat a number of fish were caught in the
Greek today. I seen a great variety of new and beautiful

===== PAGE 012 =====
1849 Page 12

June 5 flowers, I often wish I was enough of a Botanist to des-
sribe them Various Wild Geraniums, Pinks, Hally Hawks, Roses
Tulips etc, all around my bed in my tent were small Red
pinks & 4 find the flowers in general possessed of a delic-
ious Fragrance much more so than I ever found in Illinois or
the Western states the day has been Warm & Windy & at

6. 3 ofclock we started Just as it was getbing clear the
morning pleasant & Just as the sun was rising we discovered
Buffalo around us in all directions and an exciting chase
took place With our advanced Guard ; however they did not ree
turn with any Meat. the country was level and the pasture
like as if crop'dad by sheep it was close & smooth, passed :
numerous Dog towns, Buffalo at all times of the day in view.
new & beautiful flowers Mary Gold, Pot U Lacka, Geraniums
Tulips etc & along the streams Wild oats, we passed Pawnee
Rock which only appeared distant about Five or Six Miles &
we found it 14 miles, so pure & clear is tie Atmosphere.
we nooned on Ash Greek. nothing but a few stagnant pools
all tramp'd into mud by the Buffalo & the grass along the
creek entirely eaten bare. at evening crossed the Pawnee
Fork & camp'd, distance about 25 miles, grass not quite
so good as we could wish,

7 we did not start early. morning beautiful (I was on
the Guard of the Oxen) view delightful Buffalo all round
us. passed through various Dog towns during the day. our
route lay along the Arkansayks it is in general 400 yards
wide but quite shallow = water very muddy nooned on Soon
Greek - & close to it ilies the Iron work of a great number
of government Wagons which was burned by the Indians last
Season Tire, Hubs, Bands, etc laying all around tons of
it juss for the picking up - at one of tne dog villiazes
Where the earth was ecraped up we discovered a great quantity
of Gold scales mix'd with it, but it was very thin & as we
were vent on going where it was plentier we could not afford
time to stop & wash it. Camp'd on the Bank of the Arkgnsaw
the Boys all took a good bath, about 29 miles. /

8 fine morning. day cool. Flowers plenty. View Extended.
off before 5 o'clock, passed a poor lame mule which some
train had turned loose to Shift for its seif., I think its
prospect of long life very limited, the Wolves would soon
make a meal of it. during the nunt of last Sunday one of
the men lost a very fine mule, Saddle & Bridle, he dis-
mounted to assist in skinning the Buffale & off started his
mule “and never yet was found", i had a very arrow escape
tnis morning when packing the tent & bed clothes back in
the wagon one of the shot guns loaded with Balls went off &
the Ball passed through the shoulder of my coat carrying
part with it and the powder almost setting my shirt on Fire
however I sustained no injury. when we camp'd on the Banks
of the Arkansawéat. evening I took a good Bath to myself and
after tne dusty traveXling all day felt myself much re-
freshed. the river nere is about 350 yards wide and not
more than Knee deep, rapid & muddy ~ distance about 25 miles
today I crossed the River when bathing & consequently was
in Texas, about 25 miles.

===== PAGE 013 =====
1849 Page 13

June 9 Saturday morning. 4 smart thunder shower. pass'd a return
train from Fort Laramie, loaded with Skins Furs etc. Some
of our men had letters written & sent them back to the
States, I was sorry I had none ready, & felt from some
suspicious circumstance that Mr. C-- had taken some of pre-
vious letters out of the Post office - he may not have done
so - our course still along the bank of the Arkansaw. low
Bluffs on our right & the river on our left. the grass
pretty much eaten down by the Buffalo. as We are now in
the neighborhood of where a large number of Government
troops have been defeated this spring by the Comanches &
Pawnees, we travel with great caution, we double all our
guards Front & Rear, Night & Gattle Guard so that we are on
duty at least once every twenty four hours, Wwe have reports
that the troops are now pursiiihg the Indians, for the truth
we cant say - this afternoon we have passed over the most
charming & pleasing green pastures, the grass is crop'd as
close as a sheep pasture and all along the Bluff & for about
three quarters of a mile towards the river occupied as a
Prairie dog town = it must extend two miles long and more
than half a mile wide. the little Dogs would bark at us as
we passed, wag their little tails, set up on end (and I sup-
pose) wonder at our strange appearance, it is certainly one
of the most pleasing landscapes I ever saw, the Beautiful
rounded Bluffs the extended rolling plain & Rapid River
with its few fine cotton wood Trees and all in the very
richest green smooth soft grass covered like a well Kept
lawn add to all the temperature was about 76 and wherever the
eye fell Beautiful & new flowers (to us) spread themselves.
I picked some of the Cactus Kind Shaped like a cone, with
the most beautiful pink ,blue & white flowers on them I ever
Witnessed, the size of the cactus was about as large as the
upper end of a middle side’ Sugar ifke & all covered round with
small tubes & I suppose that a flower would come out of each

: in its season, at evening we camp'd close to the river and

. placed out a strong Guard. distance today about 22 miles.

: 10 Sunday morning. Pretty severe thunder storm during the
night. Cleared off in the morning & as we had made our
arrangements for a days pleasure or rest our Breakfast was
sonsequently.a late one, about 10 o'clock we seen objects on
the hills on the opposite side of the river some supposed
them Buffalo,otners Indians. the spy Glasses were brought
into requigtion and we goon discovered that they were Indians
collecting in great numbers and nearly all mounted our Bugle
sounded and all stradiers rushed into Camp. our Guns &
pistols were all reloaded and all our arms carefully & quickly
examined ag the Indians were within half a mile of us and
coming on a Double quick it certainly was an exciting time
and our Braggers & Bolsters were now as quiet as the rest of
us. we formed as quick as possible and hurried down to the
bank of the River by this time about two hundred warriors
were right opposite and we were drawn up in line, every
fellow as well armed as possible. I nad a good Riffle carrying
a large Ball, a Double Barrel Shot Gun with a Ball in

===== PAGE 014 =====
1849 Page 14

June 10 each Barrel&, a small pistol & Belt Knife. our number was
about 145 men in all taking the mule train into Count
which was camp'd about four nundred yards below us. our
numbers were certainly very disproportionate as we could
see Bight hundred or one Thousand more Indians on the Bluff
about one mile distant. we remained thus examining each
other for some time (across the river distance about 350
yards) when we discovered 4 movement amongst the Indians
and presently seven pushed their horses into the water and
bearing a flag made directly across for us; one of the
Chiefs with a red Blanket was holding up a paper and our
Gapt. step'd forward and received the Noble looking Warriors
on the Bank of the river. a number more of the Indians
now rode into tne river & stop't about half way. Gapt
Kirker read the letter ib was written by Mr. Fitzpatrick
& dated at Bent's Fort in April last stating that the Bearer
was head Chief of the Arapsahoes and that he was a friend
to the Americans. this announcement was certainly a relief
to the unwarlike and probably a dissappintment to tnose
youth who wished to hand down their names to posterity as
great scalp takers - there was a number Kioways amongst
them, all the tribe of the Arap&hoes were along - they num-
bered upwards of one tnousand - as soon as they got close
to camp we formed a guard round our Sorell naving drove in
all our oxen when we first gliscovered them - we now commenced
a, pretty active trade in mocasins, Buffalo Robes, leggings,
Sorietts evo and what astonished me was black silk H&ks,
appeared their favorite article, Velvet Vests were likewise
above par. for an old one I had on I could nave obtained
a splendid uuffalo Robe worth at least Eight dollars. Red
Cloth was mucn in demand, and a few yards of good red cloth
with a little mountain dew would have bought one of their
best Buffalo Horses altnough they would not take less than
from 40 to sixty Dollars for a good one. they are certainly
fine Horsemen and displayed great feats of Galloping off,
wheeling round & R&ining up instantly. some of tne little
Papoosies were on horseback by themselves and Galloping
round & they were certainly not more than Four years old.
I would not make the assertion but others who were there
will assert the same thing - our present to the Grand Chiefs
assembled were a plug of tobacco from each mess, I am not
certain that they considered it a most Princely one hut
they gathered it up and calling up some rather pretty young
squaws handed over the Nareotic Weed to them who soon put
it out of sight amongst the voluminous folds that encircled
their hips & saddle and galloped back chevalier fashion,
Probably the number of revolving pistols might have some
effect in making the pitiful present appear magnificent.
I presented tne Chief of the Arapyhoes with a Dutch gilt

. looking Glass and from his demonstrations of pleasure i

feel satisfied that his Highness will permit me to Wars my
own scalp should I visit his dominions, a favor which I
think would not be extended to all our train - I had a Dutch

===== PAGE 015 =====
1849 Page 15
June LO dancing doll which I let him see as a great favor stating
that it was great Medgoine he looked upon it with high ven-
eration and wnen I pulled the string and made it tarow up
its hands & feet ne was fairly ravished with delight and
called up his favorite wife to see the wonderful little med-
icine Man. he then beged leave to Kiss it and never did
devout Catholic worship uls favorite saint with half the
veneration ie Kissed it and Pow Pow'd over it some time. I
then placed it in my bosom with deep humility- he would
fondly nave possessed the treasure but I was only willing to
part with it for his favorite Horse, the struggle was severe
bub as he was on a nunting party he could not well part with
his Buffalo Horse. I think if I meet him at Bent’s Fort after
the hunt is over the Exchange will be made -- I intend to
make him believe it wlll protect him from the arrows of the
Gomanches, if I succeed I will no doubt obtain more than a
Horse from him - the evening passed over quiet & on the morn-
ing of
ly llth started at Day break and in about two hours came
to the tents of the Indians who were numerous and in gen.
eral bad good Blankets on them they are a fine locking set
of men and have numerous Herd of Horses & Oxen, we were much
amused at the Wags who pretended to take some of our Boys
for young Girls and began to carry them off much to toe ter-
ror of our Boys and much to our amusement, I had a frater-
nal hug from my old Friend,the red Chief, or the Knight of
the looking glass. their appearance in general today was
much changed since yesterday (I did not say improved) one of
the warriors would now present himself with his head envel-
oped in tri color old comfortgr , another with a waistcoat
without shirt. some sans everything but a Red shirt or
probably a check one, another only the never forgotten
Breach Clout and an old hat. altho their costume was cere
tainly picturesque yet I prefe ytd to see them with their
Buffalo Robes & Blankets - but my taste in such matters is
no criterion the Squaws undoubtedly were carefully covered
if not handsomely dressed, Some of the young. & pretty ones
were litweraly covered with Beads,Rings,Silver & Brass
plates, their hair with additions plaited into it would
reach tae ground when they were standing erect and it was
covered witn a succession of silver plates ~ we passed the
now deserted Fort Mann where a large number of Government
wagons & other things are going to loss & decay tons of
fron, chains, tire ete all laying open to the covetious and
some of the emigrants certainly have the Bump, of acquisitiveness
fully developed much more so than either Humatity or prus-
dence, as I believe they would load their oxen to death with
, any trash which could be so easily obtained from my cwn
observations Uncle Sams helps nave no desire to remove:pro-
perty when once located probably from a delicacy that it
might not feel so comfortable elsewhere--or in a new situae
tion, or most likely for favors received from the Indians
: & no previous returns made = about 4 o'clock we came opposite
to another large Indian encampment, their Horses Mules &

===== PAGE 016 =====
1849 Page 16

June 11 oxen were quite numerous & the Indians were galloping a-
round in all directions, & from their continued passing
backwards & forwards & signal Fires in the distance we cer-
tainly looked forward to an attack during the night altho
they professed friendship, yet the experienced travellers
of our company doubted them for various reagons, the Sig.
nal Fires, Pawnees Comanches, Kiowas, Araprahoes, & all those
hostile tribes being united & in Amity made us feel that
our scalps were in some danger. we placed double guards &
used every precaution that exoerience would dictate. I stood
on the first watch, I certainly thought on Tam OShanter
when he Kept such a close leek out for "Ghaists & Witches"
on the memorable night he seen‘Cutty Sark’ However I was
not fevored with a sight of the Short Shirted Indians & an-
other night which hed boded such direful events passed over
harmlessly. .we were off before 3 o'clock & passed the Senta
Fea crossings shortly after day light & camp'd in good gras¢
to reat our Wearled oxen & Sleepless men -=- about 27 miles,

12 After e short rest at Breekfast we pushed up the velley
of the Arkansas and in about 8 miles came to where « large
Indian Villaage had stood during the winter, cuantities of
old vodgsins pieces of Buffalo Robes, Térapin shells ete,
littered the ground, I visited an old Sweat House; it was
composed of saplings placed in the ground & in the center
wes a hole lined with stones for the fire & all had been
covered with Puffelo Robes, 2 great quentity of large Cotton
Wood Trees had been cut down for their Horses to Bark in
Winter. it had been a populous place but very exposed, as
andeed from the generel appearance of the country I could
see but few sheltered places, we camp'd on the river bank--—
good pasture-.-day warm about 18 mi

13 last night was quite etormy. sheet lightning all
night but no rain ~- wide valley. Road good & Rattle Snakes
plenty upwards of Twenty Killed in the forenoon--some few
seattering Cotton Wood on the River but all or nearly se on
the opposite side the day was quite cool. overTcoats in
demand - Some few Buffalo in View, from which we suppose
that we are getting pretty well through the Indians-~-Con-
secuently our valor is on the increase but we do not neglect
ell our previous precaution as we are well aware that a
Change of their locality is easily made, during the day we
seen a few Indians in the distance & we thought by"distance
made more sweet", where we camp'd at evening by sinking
about 2 feet we obtained fine clear water- our course is
still along the river & will continue so until we reach Bent'’s
Fort, the air Ceol & bracing - very few Birds. chow Larks,
Doves & Ravens & but few of them--about 25 mi,

14 Morning Cool, Beautiful valley, grass, short & smooth
like a well Kept Lawn, Buffalo numerous, Capt Rogers Killed
a fine fat Bull within one mile of the road & as our carniv-
eroug apnetites had once more returned in full force in this
pure air we cut him up Stump & Rump & carried all with us
that was portable Some Hares were seen today, at noon every
fire wes busy roasting Buffalo Meat if we hed not the Roast

===== PAGE 017 =====
1849 Page 17

June 14 Bee? of old England we certainly had much better. we had
the Roast Beef of the Wide & Green Prairlee & appetites
which would have put an ostrich to Blush. camp'd at even-
ing on the river Bank in a fine Meadow-during the day we
had to diverge from the River veky crossed some sand Hills
& the beds of dry Creeks which very much resembled the beds
of Ganals when the Water had been let off - on the bank of
one of them I discovered a flower about four feet high cov-
ered 2/Srde with large pendent yellow flowers resembling
Magnolies & larger than a hens Eggx there was about one
hundred & fifty of them it was certainly beyond exception
the most Stately & Magnificent of any flower which I had
ever seen it would have mede a plume for a Brobdignag, I
suppose it was of the Tulip species. we feel very uneasy
respecting our Guide Mr, Kirker & a young man nemed Barton
who went after Buffalo in the afternoon & have not yet re-
turned, they were in pursuit cf « large Herd which we dis.
covered crossing the River about 18 miles

June 15 no news this morning from our missing Guide & his

/ comoanion & 98 Indians have been observed for the last few

days dogang our path, we feel somewhat uneasy respecting
them, we will lay by - sometige - we have detailed forty men
with two days provision to serch for them. all are mounted
& well armed. Noon. TI have just returned into camp from
standing Guard cn an adjoining Hill distant about one &
half miles T had a fine view of the Valley of the Arkansas
in all directions Buffalo were in Sight & during my two
hours watch I seen ten Wolves four Antelope & one Hare
which afforded Nep good sport I could see him running it
at least three miles and no doubt he would have Caught it
only it was somewhat like the Antelope near Council Grove,
TI reckon it ran too fast. his desire to catch it could not

, be questioned from his appearence on hie return, I washed
a few Shirts & Stockings but during the vrocess I often
wished I had brought along that hermaphrodite Machine
"fvery Men mye own Washerwoman" we are certainly by no
means extrav epnt in the number of cur changes of linen but
when changed it is by no means easy to make them display
any of their orlginal hues but if the colors are not fast
the dirt is. we reduce all colors to the Beautiful "clay
Benk" as we Boll White, Blue & Red shirts all together, with
Jean Pants, domestic Round-a-houts & Bandanawhkfs the tints
are beautiful exceedingly Mr. Kirker & his partner have
just returned they seen an encampment some fifteen miles
off from a high bluff & supposed it was us however it was
Jackson's train of Waggons & being near dark when they
arrived there,concluded to Stay all night. our men who
hed went in quest of them in the morning 211 returned safe
some time after dark, which once more diffused general Joy
through the Camp

June 16 last night wes quite cool this morning pleasant &
drove over ea fine wide Valley with good grass. nooned on
the river Bank,good pasture. camp'd at Evening on a fine
Prairie distance today about 25 miles, towards evening

===== PAGE 018 =====
1849 : Page 1.8
June 16 we started a half grown Hare and our three dogs gave
chase, it was quite exciting for some time, turning,
dropping, ete but at last it made its escape into a pra-
irie deg hole, it wheeled tn amongst the wagons, whips
were cracked at it & every exertion used to Capture or
. Kill it, but like its Eurovean namesake it displayed so
much speed & quickness that "nothing short" of a Grey-
hound had any chance 25 miles
17 Sunday ~ we determined to travel today as we had lost
so much time-previously the orders were to be up at 2 0!
clock & stert at 4 - the morning was beautiful. the view
charming a fine Valley spread out before us covered, with
the richest Buffalo Grass & interspersed with brillignt
& rare flowers, fine 014 Cotton Wood Trees gave 9 var~
iety to the scenery. their stems were very short rarely
exceeding ten or fifteen feet high but their circumference
was great & their Branches very extended. nothing could
be more delightful than this charming valley. the brosd
Piver sweeping majestically along. the handsomely rounded
Bluffs & rich verdant plains. the Balmy & bracing morn-
ing Air, Herds of Buffalo in the distance. a few timid
Antelope & the never ceasing & alXweys amusing little
Prairie Dogs, sporting all around our vath filled up 2
picture reagly seen & never to be forgotten. ail combined.
formed a victure well worth all our travel & long Journey.
We hed only vroceeded shout six miles when the order for a
halt was given it apneared two of our men were severely
teken with dtartyoes & pronounced unable to proceed further.
Cemp'd on a rich bottom Prairie about 25 miles
18 off at 4 o'clock, morning fine but windy. pessed
the celebrated salt marsh about 18 miles long & noon'd,
drove about & miles further & camp'd on level Bottom good
gress but no wood & Buffalo chins are now Seerce ~ as we are
getting rather out of their principle range, all the way
back from here to beyond the little Arkansas the ground is
plentifully strewed with this light (& in dry weather) plea-
sant fuel the Prairies are covered with their Bones hugh
heads lie scattered all along the valley of this river as
far as I have travelfed, todsy on the sendy & Barren
y Knowls the sage or Artis &ima is beginning to assume a larger
growth. formerly it has presented the appearance of"old
man" such as we have in our gardens, there has been some
tremendeous rains but we have been fertunate enough to be
rather behind them. we can see where the plains have been
covered to a great depth & large piles of stone & sand have
been swept down from the ravines, Jackson's trein of Wag-
ons which are about 30 miles in advance must have suffered
severely, as where the road crosses any of the low bottoms
we discover the Wagon ruts to a great depth. we have been
moet fortunate as the weather along this part of our Rout:
has been fine with sufficient Wind to Keep off the Mosqui-
toes, that torment to all who visit this region in warm
calm weather about 27 miles,

===== PAGE 019 =====
1849 Valley of the Arkansas Page 19
June 19 We had a tremendeous Thunder Storm last evening, Shortly
after Pitching our Tents a large black cloud aroge &
spread with fearful rapidity. the rain soon defended. in.
torrente and with a powerful wind prostyrated some of our
temporary shelters, the orders were issued for the Bugle
to sound and corrala the oxen with all possible despatch
but down rushed the storm and the now madned cattle dash~
ed off in all directions in search of shelter, it was al-
most impogsible for man & Horse to attempt to turn them,
they would by no means face the tempest and to prevent 4
stempede nearly the whole camp were called into requisi~
tion, at last all were in safety in our well chained
corrals and after the Tornado had passed we discovered the
old saying to be true "that there is never any great loss
put there is some smell profit® if we received a good
ducking we had some of superfluous dirt washed off us.
thie morning is exceedingly windy it blows a gale but the
dir is pure, crossed a sandy desert of about 16 miles
searcely anything but wild sage grows on it. the Hares
were numerous & we had some very fine hunts as there wee
nothing to intercept our view, an antelope ran close to
our wagons & altho a number of shots were fired at it
yet it sppeared more astonished than hurt & soon left a
neighborhood where it had received such a warm reception,
towards noon we passed a large mound planted with cactus
& 7? Buffalo Heads ranged round & a pole of about 15 feet
in the center to which was attached a red Flannel flag &
two Indian scalps, one of our men cut off one of the
scalps and carried it along some supposed that it has been
the scene of 2 Battle between _the Comanches & Arapshoes
others that it is some proprisiatery offering to the Great
Spirit, if the last conjecture is the right one to say the
Teast of the action it was a very imprudent one to re-
move it for however hostile tribes may be they all respect
offerings made to the Great Spirit end an enemy when pass-
ing through his Foes country never molest those sacred
, mediums when penning those few lines in the Wagon it
is so windy that I almost expect it to capsize. towards
evening another storm appeared preparing to inundate us
the blackness of the clouds. but it passed over, dis~
tance 28 miles.
June 20 Awoke this morning by the songs of the feathered
choristers, and it certainly was a pleasing matin hymn,
we had been so long on the treeless praires that it was
: now a very pleasing change this vert of the river has a
good suoply of Cotton Wood. Birds of different Kinds
were enjoying themselves amongest the fine foliage, some
Sand Hill cranes were at a short distance---we ascended
the Bluff and wound our way over 3 dry arid plain. the
vegetation very scanty everything dry & parched, but
we were well compensated by our extended view, in the
pure cleer & cool Air objects could be distinguished at
an immense distance, the Migpage was well defined

===== PAGE 020 =====
1849 The Valley of the Arkansas - Near Bents Fort Page 20

June 20 the projecting Sluffs appeared surrounded by a lovely tran-
qguil sea and some felt almost persuaded that we had crossed
all the lofty & dangerous Mountains (how they could not
tell) and there _lay the Pacific in all its beauty - bunt
some Light breezes springing up the enchanting Scene dis-
solved, during tne afternoon it was quite Hilly & in some
places stoney & rough our Jaded cattle appeared to tread
the road with great delicacy & no Dancing master could
have todd it with more feeling & tenderness. the country
is so Arid & ary that there is little or no game at least
we seen but little however two young Antelope were Killed.
immediately on the River bottom the grass is still good.
we found some fine Black Currénts partly ripe,I caught a
few small fish but the current is go very rapid “aes I
found a difficulty in getting an Eady & where an BAady
would be formed by a projecting Rock or a fallen tree
tree it is soon filled up with sand as it is nearly as
muddy as the Missouri, every where on its banks I have dis-
covered fresh Indian signs. they show no desire of a near
acquaintance. as those lately seen kept a very respectable
distance, distance today about 20 miles. Another thunder
Storm appears ready to give us a drenching tonight some
of toe cattle gave out today but if we lose old ones we
have had one addition. a Mr. Scofield who has two fine
cows in nis team had the good fortune of fine fresh milk
by one of his cows adding a nice little Heifer to his
Wagon, some ten days ago, wnen seven days old it was able
to walk twenty miles a day. for the first few days he
carried it in toe wagon but Since that time it gambols x
along without the least appearance of fatigue - 17 miles.

21 Exceedingly warm, the Sun Beams down with great

fervoNr on this dry sandy plain and not a breath of Air.
However tae View is splendid the far Famed & far distant
Rocky Nountains are now visible and our distance is little
short of Two hundred Miles, the river here is still rising
& from the heat of the weather the mountain Snows must be
melting with great rapidity. some startling rimors have
reached us of 4 grand coalition of all the mountain Indian
Tribes, Utaws, Apaches ete, to exterminate the dgaring
intruders on their Sacred Gold Mountain if such is the
case we may yet have rather a more Bloody Battle than the
celebrated one of tne LOth Just this evening from our
encampment four miles west of Bent’s Fort we have a slear &
distinct view of Pikes Peak, We feel that we will scon
visit the first stooping place on our excursion in Search
of Gold as it is Capt Kirkers Idea that the Toas Mountains
will afford us sufficient of the raw material wherewith to
enrich ourselves. We here overtook Capt Jacksons Company
who waited our arrival so that we might approach tiose
sacred deposits of nature witn sufficient Force to convince
those heartstrong and warlike Indians that we are the favored
Race that the Great Spirit has chosen in the fulness of
time to "remove the deposits” I was much pleased with an

===== PAGE 021 =====
1849 Bents Fort on the Arkansas - Valley of Arkansas. Page 21

June 21 inspection of Bents Fort, it 18 about Two hundred feet
long by one hundred & Fifty feet, some Fifteen feet high
with two round towers of Twenty feet high It is built of
Adobtae and some 16 or 18 inches thick, it 18 clean cool
and plessént in such a scorching day - Mr, Bent was in
St. Louis for his Fall Supolies, the Fort at vresent was
only occupied by two men & Pive Women with numerous little
tewney Papoosies, who were sporting on some splendid Mex-
ieen Blankets, some of the rooms were neatly fitted up
Maps. Books, & lounges, indeed some of the Copper colored
Ladies were reclining on Buffalo Robes & Mexican Blankets
in ettitudes which might have put to shame the luxurious
Indolence of an Asiatic, they neatly turned a soft vittying
lock on our soiled & travel worn appearance, & no doubt
wondered at cur infatuation in search of Golden Hanviness
when happiness wes so easy obtained, 2 fill of Roast Buffelo
meat and a pipe of KenaKaneek, earth could add but little
more, their pleasures were supreme, & the cup of Bliss
full & running over, 12 miles,

dune 22 the longest day. we still remain in the same place.
as we hed an examination to make of our wagons previous
to entering into the Mountains - the Battalion was called
in the morning at the sound of the Bugle and a committee
appointed to. examine all the wagons etc & have all put in
such order as our means would allow of & take an early
start Tomorrow. I once more visited the Fort & spent part
of the dey in its cooling shade it is 9 delightful residence
during this burning sun on those dried up plains end from
the thickness of the walls it must be a warm winter dwell-
ing, I fished for some time in the River close to the Fort
and was quite successful, two squaws were washing Blankets
and five of their little half Breeds were playing round to
whome IT gave some small fieh which appeared to have a good
Effect on both Mothers & offspring. I do not mean to say
that they washed any faster but they pursued their work
with pleasant countenances this evening as usual, here is
a description which will do for the past week (how long it
may continue ZT Know not) Morning clear, Calm & perfectly
delightful, Noon Hot! hot! hot!! hot!!! Evening cool.
Blowing & if & tremendeous storm does not smash all before

/ it, be certain that is within at least one Mile of you for
you can see it and now the very moment I am penning this
an awful storm is rushing down the opposite hilis. it is
now coming on & I will write after the storm is over --~
Well the storm is over & it will deserve the name of Tor-
nado Tents were prostrated, and for a Short time every
thing was inundated however, it soon blows over. it was
really sublime, .the fast hurrying clouds the vivid forked
lightning & such deluges of Rain falling in a lateral dir-
ection, the snow cap'd mountains seen through the storm
all combined to render it such a Hurricane as I had never
before witnessed, I find every thing which they have to
dispose of at the fort exceedingly dear Iron 25¢,steel

===== PAGE 022 =====
1849 Valley of Arkansas shove Bents Fort June Page 22

June 22 75¢ pound, common Butcher Knife $2 to $5, however they
were willing to give us good vrices for such things as we
wanted. they offered us 15¢ p 100 for Flour. we purchased
two small & 014 carjon from them for fifteen dollars they
may prove of services to us amongst the hostile Utawse &
Apaches. es from all reports we have every reason to ex-
pect a colision with those Tribes - as yet all Intruders
on their Sacred Mountain have been repelled with great
loss. we may probably be able to make good our stand again-
st them a few days will soon Tell ==

June 23 Morning as usuel fine,cool & clear - rather late start
as we had to get our two small Ganon up from the fort -—
Road a deep yielding light clayey sandy soil, little but
wild sage, except on the River bottoms where the grass is
still pretty good - Hares very plenty - crossed the orn
about 10 milee the dust was oppressive a heavy Impaipdible
Substance hung around us almost stopping our respiration
every thing was covered with this light suffocating stuff
untill we could not verceye the next team our cattle were
much distressed, the plains was destitute of Vegatation
or nearly so. the Wild Sage excepted, one Antelope Kill-
ed - lizdards very numerous, Camo'd at sunset on the River
Bottom nearly destitute of Grass & consequently have to
oroceed this morning. about 15 miles,

June 24 Sunday Morning as usual Bright & Beayhyrul the air
cool, Sufficiently so for our Cooks to ware overcoats in
fact there has been but one or two mornings since I en-
tered on the plains in which an overcoat was not an agree-
able covering & scarcely a night in which T could not
sleep with comfort under two or three Blankets 680 much
for the cool Nights on the Plains but if the mornings are
cool the days towards noon become exceedingly oppressive
the light Impaloable dust cbscures & fills every thing
breathing becomes almost impossible - the view today is
increasing in Beauty the different mountains are becoming

_ perfectly well defined, the deep Ravénes and perpetual
snows now appear to the naked Hye and when contrasted to
the Boundless plains on which we are traveling gives great
variety to the scenery & add to all the full flowing Ark-
ansas, the only drawback is scarcity of Grass & noon day
heat. When we arrive in camp at Evening we generally con-
sole ourselves for Dust & Heat as well as possible, As
soon as our cattle are turned loose, Tents Pitched Beds
made down Fires Kindled, Water carried-then the question
arises whet shall we have for supper? Tea says one,
Coffee says another with flan Jacks. that appeared (last
evening) to carry 911 before it until& Mr. Miller suggested
Mush & Milk when a loud unanimous Shout proclaimed that
Mush & Milk was duly elected by unanimous consent and Mr.
Miller producing a fine pail of Fresh new Milk. the mush
was soon made and we certainly had a glorious and a primi-
tive Supper. certainly very suitable for our situation
but some might think very difficult to obtain but were T

===== PAGE 023 =====
1849 Valley of Arkansas - 27 Miles West Bent’s Fort | Page 23
June 24 crossing those plains again I would by all means bring a
yoke or two of Good Gows. our Kind Friends have in general
Kept us in sufficient supply for Tea, Goffee, etc, & you
see some times for more lavish use - the Grass last night
was dry & scanty in consequence of which we had to strike
our tents & proceed - about 11 ofclock we met four return
Wagons who had been to Pueblo but the fearful accounts
which they had received of Warlike & Hostile disposition
of the Utaws induced them to return, the company had
origionaly been composed of about one hundred & fifty men.
but, the Indians had stampeded upwards of forty of their
cattle which induced those few to return, the rest of tne
company had tried to push their way through to California.
. they gave us very discouraging hopes, Said that our scalps
would decorate Utaw wigwams before Winter. it may be so,
but our motto is “push ahead untill we find Gold" by those
Arkansas men returning Ivrote two letters to my Dear Alicia,
I hope she will receive tuem. it was a great pleasure to
‘ me bo think that I was gnee more conversing with her. Day
as usual Morning pleasBat. Noon hot!hot/not. Evening
windy about 9 milese
June 25 Morning pleasant & clear the mountains with their
snowy peaks in full and distinct view, the variety is
Beautiful and Grand - Deer very plenty. forenoon two
Killed. Some Hares Killed also m young Fawn brought into
camp. towards noon one of the Mule Teams took fright in
a thunder storm and threw the driver (a Mr. Sims) who was
badly crushed with the wheels and this morning the ”
26th we are detained in’Camp until] the Dr. gives in his
report, the male train stop'd behind us Where the accident
happened but we had to drive on as there was not sufficient
Grass, we are now in a Beautiful Valley. Large Gotton
wood trees & tolerable good Grass. the view unsurpassed,
. Mountains distinct and well defined the bold snowy peaks
rising into tne clouds and almost adjoining us the burning
Dry Planss. the contrast is great. I can't hold my hand
in the fire by woe on the Gaucuses, last night we had
a large Council Five round one of the Cotton Woods and all
collected round, Funny Anecdotes, Good singing, & old
reméniscences made us pass a delightful pidbant Eveninge
Gapt. Kirker dined or rather supped in my mess & his good
trapper stories gave double zest to all as we were now in
the vicinity of some of the exploits. how we wished that
some of our distant friends had been present to see our
Jovial, Hairy & ratner dirty faces as we sat in strong
relief against that fine old tree the bright blazing
fire burning clear & high and all thoughts of dangerous
Utaws lost for the time being. Horses © aes picketed all
around & the Oxen in our well Secured Corll. the more
distant objects fading away in obscurity. all continued
/ to form a picture, which some (to be) immortal artist will
hand nis name down to Posterity in Painting. I wished
Gapt Kirker to sleep in the tent with me but he declined,

===== PAGE 024 =====
1849 Pueblo Valley of the Arkansas - New Mexico = Page 24
Stampede Death and Funeral of Mr, Simms

June 26 stating for his reason that it would be a luxury in which he
sould not indulge, I offered to leave the End of the Tent
entirely open but he thought our,resniretion would be toc
confined, he preferred the stery Heavens for a Bed Quilt
and Mother Earth for a Bed, his begat for a Pillow & his
well tied and faithful horse for a sentinal, as he never
Picketed him end the trusty animel never roamed more then a
few yerds from his couch during the night, word has just
reached us from the Mule Train that Mr, Simms died of his
bruise last night at 9 o'clock they have made e coffin fer
him but will carry his remains es far as Pueblo, the day
has been warm & our Road over a dry plain as usual it hes
the sopearance of a Rrick yard no vegitetion except the
Artjimesie & Cactus some of which grows to the enormous size
& rhent of five feet & larger than any Hogshead indeed the
stems are as thick as a mans leg & covered with a profusion
of flowers of the most beautiful Kind I heve ccunted some
hundreds on one bush & each flower as large as a good size
Dahlia it certainly would make a brilliant display in a
modern flower Garden but in general the soll would be teo rich
eas it grows on a barren sandy or gravelly soil mostly on the
sides of the bluffs emongst stones, sand ete. 15 miles,

27 heavy rain lest evening and as we are now in the vice
inity of what is called the "Wet Mountains" (& I think most
appropriately) it has reined nearly all day, towards noon
A heavy thunder shower was bursting over us & te avoid

aeeldents (es we thought) we stop'd the Train and in that
situation awaited the crisis of the storm, on it same
rushing down the valley when quick as a flash of Lightning
off dashed our oxen with one simultaneous bound, never
did a number of mettled Racers at the Tep of the Drun,
when both whip & sour are well applied, show more deter-
mination to be first in the Race, Wagons were soon
capgiked, oxen lying with their heels in the air, Drivers
every place but where they ought to have been every one
Hallowing a Stempede a Stampede the Indians are on us,
I searcely Know how or by what means T found my self at
014 Bob's side holding on by his horn & bawling out my
best WO! Wol! Wol!! & true to his good training he and his
mate held back the Wegon & prevented his unruly comrades
from distinguishing themselves ihn this tremendeous Melee,
they rushed past me with a velocity for which I never could
have given them credit, the noise and confusion of upwards
cf 200 head of cattle with heavyly loaded wagons, it is
impossible to dessribe or impagine the valley was strewed
with all sorts of curiosities & rare articles intended for
the Indien trade, Flour., Bacon, Beans, Bottles with med-
icine & thousands of things of all Kinds the Injury was
much less than Anticipated, one wheel of Dr. Rogers Wagon
was smashed another wagon badly injured, some oxen much
pruised & one of B, Benvards had a horn broken off and
otherwise much Injured however as we were within half a

===== PAGE 025 =====
1843 Pueblo Velley of Arkansas - New Mexico = Page 25
: Sterile Country

June 2? mile of the Pueblo ell things are now putting to rights as
far as Mecheniem can effect ug ~ this Pueblo was a large
trading Fort but is now deserted it is nearly one hundred
& Fifty square & contains upwards of twenty or thirty good
Rooms, Blacksmiths shop, Work Shop ete it ig only one
story high built cf Adobes in a good & substantial manner
and the Rooms neatly plastered, a large & Strong Palisad.
ing remains at one and Sufficient to hold Five hundred
head of Cattle it has been 4 pleasant residence, the
Reoid River immediately in froht. oe fine wide bottom
intersnearsed with large old cotton wood Trees and a short
distance off the bold & picturesque Bluffs must make it 9
healthy summer residence as the water is almost Toy Cold,
the snows are now melting & conseguently the River is
booming full, we Burkied Mr. Simms on one of the Bluffs
where there is a number of Graves they are composed of
pure dry sand, it is a lovely but lonely spot, he will
Sleep far from the friends of his youth, the greves of his
Relsetives will be hundreds of Miles distant, no fond Mother
will Strew his lonely resting place with the sweet flowers
of affection, it will only be visited by the Wild Deer
& timid Antelope, but let his Friends feel assured that all
eare & attention wee paid £ him while suffering & every
mark of Reanect to his conse. about 10 miles,

28 Wet Night, day quite shoty. preoared our Raft. or ,
in other words repaired ,ne which another company have just
done using-a Capit. Barbed with a train of 37 wagons were
Just done crossing, and we have availed ourselves of their
Raft--the River here is about one hundred yards wide & runs
with great rapidity it is full to the banks. JI should
suppose it runs at least five miles per hour, we barat
another large canoe & with the two left by Capt Barbe® con-
structed a good raft on them, we ferried the empty wagon
at one load & the contents at another this day the mule
train have all crossed in eafety. during the morning I
gathered some large & delicious Gurrénts which are here in
great quantities acres of them together they ere fully as
large as our black cherries, colowr a bright yellow I
never seen any equal to them in the States, there ere alec
black & Red CurrAnts of equal size & quality to our garden
Fruit during my searches I discovered an Indian Grave and
an examination found e number of Beads & ornaments some
of which I carried with me, the rest I left for some other
curious traveller, or most likely to moulder into duet in
the course cf time--

29 Fine morning clear & bright, all had Breakfast and
yoked up before day light. Started for the crossing place
and by five o'clock in the evening all over safe with one
exception, a fine Black Horse got drowned in trying to swim
across he caught on a tree near the Bank & the extreme
rapid current soon carried him under -- we are camp'd where
the mormons epent one Winter & there still remains ebout

===== PAGE 026 =====
184¢ New Mexico ~ Sterile Country ~ Page 26
Green Horn Fort ~ Valley Creek-

June 29 a dozen of their Houses. it was formerly e spanish settle-
ment and there remains part of their Houses upwards of one
hundred are distinetly marked, the chimntes of the most of
them standing but not the smallest eppearansce of Cultivation
how they lived I eam unable to form any conjecture of, I
suppose like the Kilenny Cate "eat each other all up"

June 30 last night was clear Mild & Bright, I was guard on
the first watch and 2 more beautiful Night did Lover never
select to serenede his Ledys love. the repid & swollen River
aweeps nast with great rapidity its waters sparkling in the
Glear Moonlight show like silver, and the snowy mountains
in the distance, Pikes Peak, the Wet Mountain, & the Spanish
peaks all visible with the soft yet bracing Air made my
watch glide ceecefully past, and I had just turned into
Tent & peaceful Slumber were wafting me to the Dear Ones
at Home, when the startling cry of Indians/Indians!! ere
erossing the River, in an instant I started to my feet
grasned my Gun, & rushed out. every one ran into the corrald
and in a few minutes we were formed ready to receive the Foo,
none however appearing, an enquiry was made of the Guard on
Watch, who reported the Indians approsch, an examination
was now made when it appeared that a floating Log had caught
on a stationary one and formed (in Mississippi Parlance) a
Sawyer, thus we were saved another Bloody Battle -- we now
left the fine Valley of the Arkansas & Beautiful Creek
Fountein CaboXys, with ites fine currents & crossed a dry
eandy Plain, about noon we crossed a creek & watered our
dry & tired cattle and drove untill evening over a dry
broken Sandy Plain, and camp'd in a small stream six miles
from Greenhorn the country teday had a strange broken
sterile appearance, it appears only half formed every
thing looks in confusion & tumbled and tossed about. the
Bluffs composed of mouldering sandy gravelly, light clayey
soil. a few stunted cedars the only Tree, Cactus, Wild
Sage,ete, the cnly shrubs, and the most nerfect picture of
Wild desoletion in the Whole Scene I might say Cheos is
come agein, nothing has a permanent appearance except the
snow cap'a Mountains, we this day met a company of 125
men & about 500 horses & mules from Alabama, Tennessee,
etc. bound for California, they shouted to us when pasaing
that we were going the wrong way--time will tell. we feel
rather doubtful ourselves if we have taken the right Road,
put then accounts reach us of such immense numbers going
the South Pass Routéthat we think we may still be in the right
Road to Riches, 18 miles,

duly 1 Sunday, Camp'd last evening in a rugged valley &
Grass very scanty. drove over a oken plain abovt eight
milee & pitched our tents on fhe dreon Horn creek, about
one & half miles below the settlement of Green Horn

. Flourishes. there is ten or a dozen white men, orincipally
Pennsylvannians Married to Squaws of the Sioux Netion,
Strong Robust & Healthy looking women with a parcel of as

===== PAGE 027 =====
1849 Scenery of Rocky Mountains - Green Horn Settlement Page 2&7
July 1 Hearty looking children as I ever saw, how the men strive
to content themselves in this desolate Region I cannot pretend
to say. probably their lovely copper colored partners possess
inticing ways unknown to White Ladies, for my own, part I
would not remain here if one of the Hourikxs of Pardise would
condescend to share my Exile. they contrive to raise some
corn by Irrigating the Land. A supply of water is carried
along the side of the Hill from the creek, distance of the
canal I suppose two miles. there is about fifty acres of
corn, they have a very small mill turned by water, As usual
in this New Mexican Country their Houses are composed of
Adobes. Some dozen or so of Indian lodges are around they
are a motly assemblége. there is one white woman amongst
them, and her children certainly looked more pleasing to my
Eye than the Mixt breed. Gustom becomes second nature so
I must get used to it. The scenery is certainly striking
Grand bold Bluffs from ,two to five hundred feet high all a-
round covered with ced&ér ete and within four miles of our
Camp the base of those tremendsous snow top't Mountains
whose gorges, Valligs & plains afford a home for the Wild
Utaws, the GriaSly Bear & fleet Deer & Antelope, the trees
are distinctly visible & in the morning sun all] looks like
a beautiful minature-Landscape an expedition is on foot
for making an ascent to its summit. two days provision,
a little amunition, matches etc is all that is necessary.
the present intention is to remain in the Valley untild a
thorough examination of the surrounding mountains is made
under Gapt Kirker with about fifty or sixty men in search
of this far famed & long looked for Toas Gold Mine. if we
can find sufficient to hold the restless spirits of the
company in check for about four months - until the fall
Rains will make the earth look green & give our poor cattle
once more where with to fill their hungry maws, We will then
pursue our RoutéSouth, down the vally of the Gila and in
that southern Region see if Kind fortune proves propitious
to its voteries - 9 miles.

2 I have once more visited the Indian or Mexican Village
adjoining the Green Horn Settlement it is a strange mixture
of good & Evil A Mexican has a Bbl,of Taos Whisky for sale
at the reasonable sum of about Ten Dollars per Gallon - the
price seems no detriment to the indulgence of the infatuated
Indian it is as freely used at that price as a similar
article in Peoria at 5¢ per Gallon, Euffalo Robes, Moc-
kasins, Beaver Skins, Mexican dollars, everything passes
for a nominal value, the man with the great Medicine puts
his own price on it. and from his Decision there is no
appeal he is infallible and cannot do wrong. Since I have
come up from the Settlement a regular fight has taken place
and one of the Delaware Indians is now led into our camp
with his arm completely shattered near the Elbow, it is an
awful looking wound but he appears to bear it with doical |
indifference the Dr has dressed it but his opinion is that
amputation will have to take place, however the pure Air

===== PAGE 028 =====
1849 Green Horn Valley - Indian Fights ~ Love - Mountains Page 28
July 2 of this Mountain region may prevent Mortification, unquestion-

ably was a similar accident to take place in I}linois at this
season, nothing short of amputation would save him, he is &
strong likely young Indian. Speaks good English but was mak-
ing love to one of the beautiful Mexican Women in rather too
free and Easy an Indian Manner to be quite agreeable to her
Don, about a Dogzen Rif¥les were fired at him, only the one
taking effect. Deer numerous Hight or ten Killed. Day
charminge

3 Morning very fine. sun bright & beautiful. Still re-
elining in this romantic country & viewing nature in her
native grandure - unassésted by the puny Efforts of man. Here
she puts on the no 8% Magnificant dress every thing on a scale
of Grandeur. Exten%ed Plains, Elevated Mountains, Rocky
Precipices, deep Ravines, filled with immense Pines, the
beautiful Planes extending from the feet of the Mountains
covered with rich grasses affords fine pasturage for our
catble and our huntsmen are continually on the alert. Deer
& Antelope are plenty, Grouse are found in all the thickets
go that we have a continued feast of Game, the Waters are
pure & cold. clear & limpid rushing over their beds of
Auriferous sands but unfortunately in our present location
they afford no fish, but Game is so plenty we need scarce
regret the absence of the piscatory tribe. preparations are
going on today for the exploring party. packs are making
up of the various necessaries, Mining Tools, Beds, Batibles
etc to be ready for the Glorious

4th this ever Memorable Morning has arisen on our peaceful
camp, with if possible renewed beauty the sun shines clear
& Bright the gentle Zepner fans our brows, this pure bracing
Mountain Air invigorates our limbs and altho far from our
Friends & home we are yet in the best of spirits, all in
good health & every face wearing & smiling appearance Con-
gratulations pass round, Invitations to call and taste some
of the long protected delicacies packed by our Dear ones at
home and now for the first time examined since our start.
all find some little agreeable surprise Bon Bons, Mementogs
even hidden love letters reveal taemselves on this Glorious
day, loving wives, have not been forgetful & distant Husbands
probly find as many soothing & Kind objects placed by their
sweet wives at home to thus greet & cheerk their now absent
Lords, all is gaity & hilarity and a General invitation
awaits us to a Banquet in Mr Armstrongs tent at the primitive
hour of 18 ofclock. at present all the camp are assembled
and the exploring party starts under the renowned Gapt Kirker
in search of the long looked for Toas Gold Mines. tWo men
from each wagon was the order, Our wagon crew cut for choices
I was unfortunate & consequently left. the detatchment con-
sisted of about 56 men, we fired our Caron, gave them 4
hearty cheer & shake by the hand & off they Started ~ the
hour of Vinner arrived & so did we;the spacious tents were
arranged on a Velvety grassy plain under two large spreading
Pine trees the shade wag cool & Refreshing. tankards of

===== PAGE 029 =====
1849 Thoughts of Home - Storms - Mountsin Scenery Page 29

July 4 pure Ice Water & something stronger graced our Table. Veni-
son (Deer & Antelope) Grouse, Ham,etc, Peach & Apple ples,
Pickles, Tarts, preserves, sardBnes, oysters etc,in fact, as
landlords say every Delicacy the season affords & certainly

: our Bar was supplied with the best of Liquors, and our appe~

tites done full & ample justice to the good things set before
us, Toasts were drank to all the Dear Friends left behind
and many a thought and many a fond wish for their happiness
passed from our hearts to our lips. we thought on the last
twelve months, the present situation, the unknown dangers &
difficulties which environ our path for the ensuing year,
and if we might ever return to our dear Wives, Sweethearts &
friends but all thought of a sombre cast soon Vanished from
our hilarious Board, Wit & song beguiled the time until
the Bugle sounded 4 retreat to slumbers, we then visited
those dearest to our hearts (at least in immagianation) and
until the mornings sun once more called us up we reveled
in their happy society. the day continued beautiful - we
had snow on our dinner table.

5 Morning bright but at noon a large heavy black cloud
gathered towards the region of snow it soon approached the
plane on which we were encamped & a counter current of Wind
meeting it. the Storm of Rain was stoped abruptly about four
hundred yards from us. the effect was singular, the cloud
presented a perfectly even face and the rain descended in
torrents & all along its side was perfectly free from the
least moisture it then ascended the Mountains & I thought
of the Giants of the Brochen - taking awful strides -
immagisnation required but little streatch, to people the
dark massy clouds, rolling up the Rocky gorges with all sorts
of Spectral figures, the thunder here appears to burst and
crack & Rattle right over your heads, some of the Camp have
been up to the snow, & heard the thunder roll beneath their
feet. all diversity of Mountain, Plape, & Valley are here,
Such sites far summer dwellings could not be exceeded. lofty
Pines, scattered “ in groups present the appearance of a
spacious Doméi#e, Deer & Antelope fill the glades, limpid
cool water meander through the vallé¢s, Rich grasses cover
the plaing and all that is wanting is civilized man to make
an Eden of this Garden of the Wilderness, Morning congratula-
tions pass. Any headache says one? Just a little says an-
ether, anything left? Well I guess mighty little, however
here goes for an examination & after the most dilligent search
there Was nearly enough to wet tne Whistles. now teetoxtalers
come on, here is your abode, real health without fictitious
stimuldnts, the Limpid cool beverage from the Brook, in-
vigorates and strengthens for the days duties, we this day
cut hauled and split a lot of pine to make a charcoal heap,

: sufficient to mind all our wagons and put everything into
complete repair previous to our Mountain Journey - we have
two fine pair of new Bellows fitted up under two large Pine
Trees which afford a graatful Shade to our athletic sons of
Vulcan, all goes me rr live on in our Camp & our lives are

===== PAGE 030 =====
1849 Purity of the Atmosphere - Barbeds Camp - Indian Page 30
Hospitality -
July 5 passed in fine Variety. Night Guard, Gattle, do Repairs of
Wagons, Cloatifs, Washing, Smoaking, Singing, Music, Hunting
& some small games of Poker, the latter to be paid in Toas
wine when we go toere (if ever)
6th & 7th days beautiful bright & sunny. but always about 3
o'clock a storm on the mountain peak, it is pleasant to set
at our tents on this lovely plain and behold the war of ele-
ments, without partaking in any way of the disagreeable.
the Clouds tumbling & tossing in all sorts of Fantastic
shapes the Torrent of Rain pouring out of them, the #ind
howling round the lofty pines, & where we set (not more than
one or two miles off) receiving only a few drops of cooling
rain Just sufficient to lay the dust & moisten the atmosphere
it then clears off &« the Green Pines form a fine contrast to
the shining & brillient snow. Rugged Rocks & deep ravines,
game is abundant and venison is in every tent. Young Fawns
brought into Camp & if we do not soon move we will have
enough to Stock a modern Deer Park ~ the Air is so pure that
one of our oxen which was accidentally Killed six days ago
shows the Beef as clean & clear of decomposition as the day
on which it was Killed, and as there are no Wolves around
this place the meat remains perfectly undisturbed (the
voracious Gentlemen having taken a tour on the lower plains
with the Buffalo) '
8 Visited Mr. Barbeés Camp, they were all in confusion
dividing their provisions etc. prior to their sep€ration
some going to Santa Fe, some to California & others re-
turning to the States by the latter, I sent some letters,
Poor faint hearted Fellows the first Mountain with the re-
_port of Wild Utaws & the lillyshood of losing a few white
sealps scares them back to their civilised homes. well,
well, I have come so far tnat I must see something more be-
fore a return movement takes place. anagifi ty still prevails
in our camp & I think we are sufficiently strong to brave
all dangers. I went over to the Green Horn Settlement during
the afternoon & remained 411 Night. I was much pleased &
gratified by the Kindness of the Indians. a fine Bed off
Buffalo Robes was spread down for me, it is true that during
the Night the number of my bed fellows were considerably
augmented when I awoke and looked at my companions, I thought
of Mazeppa, certainly if I had not Wolves around my Gouch, I
had shaggy monsters who closely resembled them, but they were
peacable. they only eat up part of a Deer which my Host
Ino Wanaha&k had killed during the day, and as the moon shone
clear & bright I witnessed them during every movement of
their bloody feast & congratulated myself that he had been
so fortunate as to find something to stay their appetite in
. place of a white stranger who had for one night availed him-
self of his hospitality. My host was rather a iiealthy Dela-
ware Indian he had been recently at California & trapped
his way through the mountains to this place & had upwards
of 200 Beavers Skins, 10 horses, 7 Dogs, 3 squaws & various
other valuable property any and all of which was for sale :

===== PAGE 031 =====
1849 Indian Hospitality - Near Greenhorn = Dress ~ Page 31
Heat - Stampede ~ return of Minere
July 8 for Ardientie or any other desirable barter, which the white
man hed to dispose off. day very warm 115 in shade
2 Day so very warm, JI wes compelled to remain until&
evening with my Indian Friends When I returned once more to
Camp the Indians were very Kind, Dried Buffelo Meat & thin
Block Cakes conetituted our principle food & 9 Little
Ardientie which he procured from a treder at the moderate
price of one silver Dollar for a Small tin Cup full. the
Women busied themselves during the day making Dresses of a
Kind cf white muslin with a small red snot & stitched with
black thread, worked with blue beads, the contrast is very
atriking, it might not have pleased some of the Belles of
the States, but here it was considered in great taste & T
could see that the squaws of the other lodges envied both
the wealth & sunerior design of the Mrs, Wanahoek’s, the
Muslin was worth about 10 or 12 cents per yard. here TI
think he vaid the trader one & half Dollars per yard. I
made them some emall presents & Received some Mockasins
possible sack Kanaxaneek pouch etc - Day very hot - 114
in shade
10 Glear & unclouded with one exception, over the top of
the Peak a cloud hung all day & how we envied the pines who
were in its grateful shade & we roasting, Baking, & frying
in the burning Sunshine & all we had to do was cast up our
eyes & behold the dazzling snow, but still it would not
eeol us, progress with our Blacksmith work, one happiness
in this heeting plain we have pure clear & cool water -
118 Deg - Farn.in shade
11 during my mornings dut¥e as cattle Guard from twe
o'clock till breakfast, I was estonished a few minutes after
repairing to my post & placing my men to hear a rushing
eound, like 9 tornado, when the cry of Stampede a stampede
in the corrél & there went the oxen with one rush for the
mouth of our pen, smashing down all before them. one wagon
was completely broken,another overthrown & five or six oxen
tumbled into a heap one had his neck broke another his
horn Knoeked off & various bruises & hurts were received hy
a number of them. after a little delay, we collected our
scattered stock & recorralied them, with the exception of
Dead & wounded.
12 last evening some few of our gold seekers returned
with very discouraging news, none of the precious Metal
to be found & that the remainder of our men would return
on Tomorrow, they gave vivid descriptions of the Mount—
ankous Country through which they passed, the great
cuaentities of Game, Deer, Bear, Antelope - some of each
being killed & as much Bears 011 obtelned as will grease all
our hairy faces and give us once more a slick & Goose like
appearance, the weather has changed this afternoon & a
cool Bree&e sorings up. the change will be pleasing after
this Torrid Zone business, if not too sudden, this evening
all. our men have returned only a few small perticles of
Gold having been found, Capt Kirker has a large piece of
ore, which appears strongly mix't with silver, he says

===== PAGE 032 =====
1849 More Stemoedes - Change of Climate ~ Page 32
Excuse for Smoxking

July 12 that there is large Rocks of it thrown from an extinct
Voleeno, some to uowards of a mile distant from where the
Crater was, he will have it tried at Chideughua, should
it prove rich, the quantity is inexhaustible, there is not
a Chemist in the Company, so at present it cannot be
thoroughly tested.

12 Onke more stampede last evening end as the Night was
dark, we were uneble to get our Wild oxen back into the
Cofmls, we have Spent the entire day in search of them
and have recovered ell but about twenty. some of them
fifteen miles on their return towards their native fields,
three of the missing oxen belongs to our wagon, I feel
quite uneasy about them Should they not be recovered TIT
know not what will become of cur wagon, our load is
heavy - T hope Tomorrow may return the Missing “it is a
strange & a fearful thing" thie stemoeding an uneccount-
able fear takes nossessicn of the oxen from some triffling
cause when off rushes the whole herd & smash, crash, every
thing that opvosee their headlong fury must give way all
sense & judgement (if they ever possessed any) seems en-
tirely lost. there is no obstAcle sufficient to stop
their wild Career untill exhausted Nature gives way, before
such imoettour exertions & the worst of the matter is that
one Stampede only appears the forerunner of others for ours
seems deily to improve on the first one both in speed &
Fury, the Climate & scenery here are both strange & new
to us, Yesterdsy the Thermom&ter was about 112 Deg. in the
Shade of a well Ventilated Wagon & another in a tent gave
one Degree more, this morning it was snowing on the
Mountain Too & some light particles descended even as lev
as our Camp. I put on ell my extra flannel. our men
are now getting very fond of the Kenaheneek and at night a-
round our Watch Fires every fellow sits with hie pipe in
his Jaws telling some of the Miraculfis events of hia life
& as I have been the only one whose mouth seemed Empty,
it was considered that if I did not employ my time in the
valueble emusements of smoaking I had time snough to enter-
tain the assembled Gold seekers, like Schirizerade, of
two evils I say choose the least, & as the Indian sub-
stitute for Tobacco was both plesént & mild. I was not
long in making my decision, so, now, no Deiderich Doug-
henhougher sits over the sweet obiviator with greater
nenchal€nee, Stampedes may go to Guines Utaws & Grizzly
Bears may scalp each other,Thunder, Gusts, Tornedoes &
Hurricanes mey rush through the mountaine but there I
sit forgetting the world & by the world forgot--

14 We cut more pine timber for Charcoal not having
enough to complete our Blacksmithing I accompanied the
. wood cutters as one of the Guard end as soon es sufficient
was cut sscended the mountain for about five hours steady
walking and after herd & severe fatigue approached the
regions of perpetual snow, I will not ettempt to deserthe

===== PAGE 033 =====
- 1849 Mountain Views - Sundsy - Beautiful Velley Page 33
Prepare to Acend the Mountain
July 14 the extended view in that pure atmosphere, it must have
been upwards of one hundred miles, the beautiful. plains
lay before me like a lovely picture, their highest
elevations not appearing larger than mole hills & all
spread in clear Sunshine, whilst actually at my back a
heavy Black Gloud was discharging 9 severe shower it was
a sight such as T had never before witnessed and such as
T may never see again and but a few men in the many ever
behold it was worth all. the fatigue and scrambling I had
over rocks and under dense Pines & here I stood 411 alone
on thie magnificent Mountain not one to give my feelings
of admiration vent to (with exception of my faithful Nep)
& him I gave an additional fondle to & signee that T
must soon descend from such @ sublime specticle & high
elevation I could have snent days in the contemplation
of it but the descending sun gave notice that longer de-
lay would be attended with danger & so down I hurried
and after the fatigues of the day slept soundly. day
warm & fine
15 Sunday this beautiful morning brought thoughts of
home. TI could scarcely immagine that all this rich &
veried scenery, soft sunshine & deep shade, Steen Rock
& level plain all, all lay far removed from the sound
ef Church going Bell here man might Worship the God of
Nature in the deep solitude undisturbed by the busy hum
of men he might lift up his heart in undisturbed re-
pose end feel his presence in the Magnificence of his
works, in those Temples not made with hands his Soul
might soar aloft to the great Giver of all goods & feel
that his Fatherly care was extended to all his creatures,
here "the poor Indian whose untut&red mind, sees God in
Storme & hears him in the Wind"

16 Capt Phillins & I coneluded on a stroll up a small
valley which lay North of our Encampment. we started
after an early Breakfast and followed a clear Stream for
some four miles when we entered on an ooen extended plain
covered with rich Buffalo Grass & interspersed with
clumps of large Pine Trees & occasionaly a few scattered
ones, the sun shown clear & bright & a gentle bree%e
sufficiently te cool the Air lent its bracing freshness
to add to our enjoyment of the day & scenery. we spent
a delightful day & ruralized to our hearts content. I
wos only sorry that such enjoyments could not be extended
to some of my distant Priends, how I thought my Brother
would enjoy such a Picture deep shade, good rich grass,
clear stream, Rock Mountains ete all around & just
sufficient fear that ay gehen Utaw might be concealed
in the adjoining Chap ee€,” ready to take a Scalp, I
Killed a few Grouse, Cant P, cooked them in good camp
style & after a day spent in real enjoyment in the
handsomest valley I was ever in we returned to camp &
dream't of -=.

===== PAGE 034 =====
184¢ Ascend the Mountain -- July 17 -- Wet & Cold Page 34

July 17 Two of our daring hunters had just {as we came back)
returned from s two daye excursion to the ton of the high-
est Mountain Peak, their glowing descrintion set my mind
on fire, I determined T should at least attempt it &
early in the morning I tried to find a companion for the
difficult Journey & after some time a Mr, John Hensley
agreed to be my Sompnanion. “We packed up @ little dried
Buffelo meat, a few crackers & some of my Peoria Cinger
cakes in all sbout 1$ lb. T carried a double Barreli
shot gun,;some Buck Shot & Bight Balis & + lb powder
H. had a RifSle .20 bells & % lb vowder, the morning
was warm, JI went without a coat & otherwise in a light
dress, he was also thinly dressed but carried a single
Woolen Blanket. the reason of our light Dress, cloxthing,
& Provision was that we could overcome difficult places
with more ease, after about an hours good walking we
found ourselves at the Foot of the mountain & taking out
my tin cus we took a drink of the pure water (we had
nothing stronger with us) & began the ascent, ‘When we
left the plains the sun was shining brightly but abeut
half way from the top down was enveloped in thick fog.
after some three hours we approached the foggy curtain &
soon entered it, when all view of the Plains was hidden
from sight. We now rested some time in hopes that it
would clear off but not doing so we resumed our march.
it had been getting colder & now it began to rain, IT :
wrapoed the Rlanket round me (my commenion had a light
hunting shirt) but nevertheless my Teeth began to chatter
all my exertions could not keep me warm, but on we went
mostiy over steep, rugged rocks & prostrate Treas, some~
times our path was better & then we went cheer&ly on.
Our determination was to ascend the "misty mountains
top" and nothing daunted we got to what we thought the
top at about three o'clock (we had no watch) & rested
enee more, T thought I heard Frogs croaking. we thought
that impossible, however we up & off in the direction of
the sound & sure enough there ley a small green valley,
pure cold eprings, snow wreathas & a variety of flowers
all in the space of one or two hundred acres. we sat
down in estonishment to see the pure green grass &
varigated Flowers after tolling over shindly & volcanic
Rocks & stunted Pines, the Thunder had been rattling all
around & generally a heavy fall of sleet. I was wet to
the Skin & cold, but the sun now shown out for a few
minutes & we discovered we had still some miles to go
before reaching the top. we followed the stream to the
fountain heed, and there looked out for a camping place
for the night (as it was a dense fog once more) we dis-
covered two lerge Pines whose tons Snproached so close
that they formed a pretty good canopy against the fall-
ing sleet. we now gathered a large lct of dead Pine
mode 9 rearing fire and under the circumstances made

===== PAGE 035 =====
1849 Alarm - Morning - Megnificent View ~- Page 35
Utaw Hunting Grounds ~ Sheep - Elk -

July 17? ourselves as comfortable as the case would admit. we
dried our wet & saturated cloAthing & warmed our benumea
limbs, Towards evening it partially cleared off & taking
a Brand from the fire we, once more Started. we soon got
enveloped in fog, but scorned to give up & proeseded untils
we reached the Apex, when the storm as if waiting our
arrivel at the summit now burst forth in torrents of cold
Chilling rain & extinguished cur fire, we Kindled it for

: the purmose thet it might be seen from the camo. we were
now compelled te give way to cur misfortunes, and returned
with wet skins & sorrowful hearts to the Camp, if we could
call it such & await patiently to see what another day
would bring forth. we collected a large pile of wood to
answer for night purposes increased our fire & made the

best disocsition in our power to pass the Night. we made
a frugal supper on our dried meat & hard Biscuits with
pure snow water, dried our guns, lesid them down by our
sides told the good and faithful "Nep" to keep © close
look out for wandering Utews & tried to take a little re-

‘ nose. I found it nearly impossible, having no coat & only
a few days nrior I had laid aside my undershirt, however
cold & wet*t was the fatigue of ascending the mountain over-
came all & T fell into a gentle slumber & drem't of Home
& friends until Nep gave se low growl when both Mr.
Henseley & self jump't te our feet & grasped our Guns &
Treed we waited in anxiety some time but finding all
quiet we returned to our fire replenished it and warming
our chilled & wet Bodies discussed the cause of our dis-
turbance we thought it most likely a Panther es the bed
of one was only e few yards off where lerge quantities of
Deer & Antelope Bones & Hare were scattered around, the
Night was now dry & clear the stars were shining brightly
put it wae intensely cold & freefing. we sat up untils

18 morning & the first streaks of day found us on our
wey uo. we soon passed out of the pines & entered on the
bare scalp of the mountain. deep snow lsy in our way but
sufficiently hard to bear our weights, shingly Rocks and
here & there little tufts of moss covered with the richest
fine small flowers continued untill we reached the top.
in e few minutes the sun arose clear & bright & now a
sight burst on our vision which emply repaid us for all
our previous toils & labor, the wide extended plains ley
in the full sunshine as far as it was possible for the
vision to reach, the Arkensas upwards forty Miles off
lay within a short distence our camp some twelve miles
off lay right under our feet, we could look down on the
tall pines towering rocks & felt that we were indeed on
the top of the Rocky Mounteins a few yerds on the western
sides from where we stcod the mountains were completely
precipit&ious, TI should think at least one thousand feet
of crumbling rock-below this the pines appeared & further

===== PAGE 036 =====
1.849 Down the Mountein - Return to Camp - Game Page 36

July 18 on a large fertile looking valley intersected by numerous
small streams the favorite hunting ground of the Utaw
& where the foot of White man seldom intrudes, beyond this
were large ranges of peaked mountains partially covered
with enow to the sovth arose the Spanish Peeks or two
Buttes & in the North, Pikes Peak & 911 esround mountaing,
Vallis, Precipices, etc. it was such a sight as I "nee'r
shell look upon its like again" on a Peak about ea mile
off we sew a flock of Rocky Mountein Sheep, which we tried
to approach but they bounded off to their inaxcessAble
fastness where it would be Impossible for man to follow,
we had better success with some elk which were feeding in
a Valley a short distance below. with great caution we
erept close to them and selecting the largest, both fired
at a signel, the lordly fellow gave a few tremendious
pounds & tumbled over. our Enives were soon into his
throat TI discovered that both Balls took effect. we cut
as much of his tender loin as we could eat gave Nep his
fill & left the rest for the prowling wolves, Grizzly
Bears or Panther, I would give Twenty Pollars to have
his Noble Horns in the States, but here lays lcts of
horns as large as his, the belance cf them ran only a
short distance & then Stop't to gaze on the White Intruders.
we ent our breakfast where few white men ever eat before,
looked around with awe & admiration drenk some pure snow

. water & prepared for our descent, we passed along the

ridge of the mountein untilt we came to a depression and
following it down entered a ravine, passed over Ceep snow
Beds, some of which were at least twenty or thirty feet
thick. the emall streams & enrings entered from either
side and soon formed quite a rivulet which we pursued over
its rocky & preciovituous bed, we clambered down steep
rocke by the aid of buehes & roots, ocasaionally the
rocks closed into the bed of the stream and left only a
narrow channel through which we were obliged to wade, the
overhanging rocks rising five te Eight hundreé feet above ‘
our heads such places are called canons (Keynons) to-
wards evening we emerged from this ravine & entered the
pleins, JI shot two turk&eB & some grouse a short distance
from camp where we arrived safe & sound at sunset. day
warm on the pleins.

19 we are making preperations for starting on our Jour~
ney, as our wagons are now in good repair, the streyed
oxen ere all recovered, some of them lost ten days &
founé at a distance of near 40 miles off. part of the
Mule train about 20 men have packed on mules & with an
Indian Guide taken through the mountains, a sick Dr.
from the train which passed about 2 weeks ago remains in
our Camp & intends travelling with us for the benefit of
medical advice - more of him hereafter —- Game, Deer &
Antelope are very plenty around us, Leo Summers shot
three Deer at one shot, it seems rather a tough yarn
but nevertheless true, Turkey & Grouse are not very

===== PAGE 037 =====
1849 Game - daily storm - delays - Sardines - Page 37
July 19 plenty. Meddow Lark & Doves abound & in the upper

valleys of the mountain I seen Robins. Small birds are
scarce, during my night Guard in Moonlight I was pleased
to hear a bird often singing it is about the size of a
Gat Bird, black brown & #hite. Reptiles, Lizzards are

. very numerous on the sandy plains Rattle snakes, Horned
Frogs etc. more numerous than agreeable. I killed a Rattle
snake when on Guard today Five Feet seven Inches long and
ag thick as my arm, the motion of the Horned Frog is like
the lizgard not in bounds like the comén Frog, but in
a rapid running motion, Grizzley & Black Bear, Panthers
etc. are plenty in the mountains. the wolves are generally
in the train of the Buffalo. the Rocky Mountain Goat ,
or Sheep keep only the most inaxcessdble precipices in
toils immediate encampment we have no fish, Trout are in
the streams some short distance off, We have now a daily
shower about 2 o'clock, the Wet Mountain puts on his
Night Cap & in less than an hour, the beavy rain reaches
the Camp & drenches everything, accompanied by heavy thunder
& lightning. the evening clears off cool & bright

20 Making prepArations for starting. we are getting tired
of this long delay, but as yet our wagons are not completly
repaired, Forenoon very warm, Storm towards evening &
then cool. Wore game brought into camp.

21 Still delayed until Monday when an actual start will
take place - three more of the men, Leo Summers & others
have deerme @e* to try the ascent of the mountain. So
out of Barbe&s train & our own near three hundred men only
seven have dared the difficult ascent - B's train nave
started from here nearly two weeks - in the enumeration
of tne Birds I might mention a Magpie having killed one &
the only one I have seen, tne maids are even scarcer,
so that the "Maid & the Magpie" if performed here would
certainly draw a crowled House “Tent*, Mr, Refse opened
another of the cans of sardines in Mr. Armstrongs tent &
we had another fourth of July on a small scale, the
Aguardcenti being absent. the day as usual storm in the
evenings

22 Sunday our Preacher being rather unwell, we had no
Sermon, but considerable good singing. the men returned
from the Mountain “faint & Weary” they tell wonderful
stories of bear, Elk, Sheep, Deer etc - the great fatigues
undergone but amply repaid by the view.

23 Started at last, got fajrly under way by 8 o'clock
& drove about 15 miles to tustans Creek, the plain dry
& sandy not a spear of grass & but little at our camping
ground, We have a split in our company in conseyuence
of a young Missourian refusing to stand Gattle Guard, the
mule train with Capt Kirker refuses to continue with us.
The two companies are pretty nearly equal. I think we
rather out number them, I will count in a day or two. both
camped almost together, last evening or last night a

===== PAGE 038 =====
1849 Split Company - Mound ~ Chaos! — Game ~ Page 38
Beautiful Mustang - Hunting Valley - New Road

July 23 severe Thunder storm blew down cur tent & wet everything.
Set it up again & slept wet untilk morning. passed ® mound
on the plain about four hundred feet high, .it is circular
the rest of the plein has gredually in the course of ages
worn eway from it as it is mostly composed of Granitic Rock
& the plains are clayey It presente a striking land mark.
The waters of this creek are quite muddy, day passed with-
out Rein!!! 18 miles,

24 over a dry arid plains no grass. Antelope in herds,
The country hae an unfineshed appearance, Cheos, chaos,!
All thet hes @ permanent appearance ie the jumbled up
mountains with their snow cap'd tops on our right hand and
in by their beres looks green & refreshing. but we have to
keep out on the plains, to avoid as much 98 pessible the
steep Bluffs & Ravines, we heave no road to Guide us but
Keeo s resvectful. distance from the foot of the Mountains
& oush forverd in a South direction, Horned Frogs, Liz-
zards, Rattle enskes, etc. plenty, camped gn the Apishetes
Ereek about 15 miles plenty of fine currents & some
tolerable grass day pleasent.

25 Beautiful day. rolling dry plains. drove ell day
twenty miles without water in the afternoon came on a
lerge Valley & if IT would say thet all the Game IT hed pre-
viously seen(Buffalo excented) would not equal it I would
still be short of the mark Antelope were in Inumerable
heards. Deer olenty on the creek where we are camped

: one Wild cat was killed. Some two or three panthers end
a Grizzly Bear were also seen but last although not least
a small drove of Mustangs were seen it was the first of
those noble Animals I had ever seen Wild and their grace~
ful movements over the Boundless plains in all their
native pride & conciousness cf perfect freedom gave them
a beauty & Grace in my eyes which I had never noticed
before in the noble enimel, the leader appeared verfectly
aware of his superior speed over his fellows subjected
to mars use, and snorted, pawed, & galloped around tossed
high his noble head. Shook his flowigg main and then
darted off followed by hie whele seraglio. Some of the
Boys felt much tempted to possess themselves of him dead
or alive & the unerring Riffle was frequently raised to
the shoulder but TI eried shame! shame!! & was followed by
others & so this noble son of the desert escaped for the
cresent, Some thought that they could just crease the
neck sufficient to bring him down without killing, I
thought the experiment tco dangerous. What @ valley this
would be for a party of young men from the states to
spend a few months in limpid, ceol, water. pure Air,
Snowy Mountains on the one hand, dry plains on the other
& in this large Valley, rich green Buffalo grass & ae for
game I will say nothing. TI have this afternoon seen neser
one thousand Antelope & Deer, Bear, Wolves, Cats, Panthers
etc, undoubtedly are plenty where so much game is & this
day we travelled through at least ten miles of Bog towns

===== PAGE 039 =====
1849 New Road - Greeks = Cactus - Ascent of the Page 39
Raton Mountains
July 25 How will Saratoga, Cape May or any other watering place
compare with this for a summers amusement, As to the
danger from Utah's it will only give zest to the sport,
If I ever return with a few cf the rocks in my pocket I
will spend one summer seeson in this paradise of hunting
Valley and bring some choice spirit with me. to-night
we were regaled with a concert of wolves -- about 20 mi,
26 drove over an open country without almost the trace
of a road & where few if any wagons had ever been before,
We were travelling through a comolete "Terra Incogitie"
along the base of the Mountains & in general the Road
was good & as to be supposed in a country so seldom
visited by man, game was abundant, during the whole day
we were scarcely ever out of sight of Antelope. We saw
only two wild Horses, the Cactus grew to a great height
& presented great variety of Flowers, the dead stems would
form the most beautiful wood for rustic gates, seets, Arbors
ete ag it nresents the eppearance of the most elaborate
carving & the center of the wood is hollow which would give
it the most greaesful light appearance not at all inter~
fearing with its Rusticity as it would not interfesre with
eny known style of Architectures, last evening we camp'd
on the "Mininas" & this on the "Piquet Mir", we are now
. almost on the Road which leads from Benth Fort to Toas,
About 20 miles,

27 Started early um the "Piequet Gir" Creek & followed
up one of the Branches over 9 very hilly uneven Road.
early in the morning previous to coming into the Santa Fe
Road, I discovered a very Beautiful Round cedér tree
which on examination anpeared to shede the Graves of four
Soldiers, who were Burried in this rural reeting place
ahout two years ago. A more lovely plece for the reposs
of the dead could not be found. on the left a large
mountain reare its head & et a short distence appears
like a church with part of the Steeple broke off & tumbled
down, the Valley up which we wound our way abounded in
flowers, some of which I gathered, I was sorry for the
loss,of my orevious collection which by the carelessness
of Gédfon Farrow was lost in crossing the Arkénsas, Some
times to day we passed through fine Pine Groves which
threw cut 9 grateful shade. at other times over rough
uneven Rocks but take it all together this crossing of
the Ratone Mountains was by no means so difficult as was
anticipated we are now camp'd about two miles of the
top & the next waters we reach will go directly to the
Gulf of Mexico, No longer shall we drink of the waters
which Emoty into the Mississippi Well* (*Error, we did
not arrive et the waters which empty into the
untill the -) We have travelled now near four
months on Streems all of Which are swallowed uo in the
Father of Waters, we have passed over the place today

- where Kendall was taken, but we could not tell the exact
place, so,conjectured it as near as nossible, on the
"Ploquet Sir" Creek we seen ten graves of men who died
last fall, belonging to a government train, the

===== PAGE 040 =====
1849 Broken Wagons - dusty dey - Beautiful Page 40
Velley .— Still continued

July 2? particulars I did not learn, the day hee been fine it
ie now a clear gold bree%e on this high mountain, & all
the camp busy, Mr. Rankin, Raking, Capt Phillins cooking
Venison, Oakly making mush, every fellow herd at work &
I heve just pitched my tent laid down our Beds & taken
up the ven. as this day & night I have neither Cattle
Guard, Night Guard or any other Guard so, I will now to
supper "with what Appetite I may" & this Mountain air cer-

: tainly leave us with only one desire & that is to have

a sufficiency as to the quality we are not overly fastid-
fous, our corrdl ig in e Dog Town & one of the holes is
at the end of our Wagon, the little tennants are teo
much afraid to show their faces about 15 miles,

28 morning slesr & cool arrived at the summit et ehout
8 o'clock, fine View, the white mountains on our Right.
on our left the rugged precepices of the Reton® Mountains
& the Valley down which we were to travel in front,
Cranddalis wagon broke e wheel when about two miles down
it detained us 2 hours to remove the load into other
Wagons & proceed & shortly after Rankink wagon met 2
Similar fate, both of which we must repair, the Vallteys
are well. supplied with currénte & beautiful Pields of
Flex frequently present themselves, but our Road is
extremely dusty and as our routeis now almost south we
may expect from the prevailing winds to suffer much, thie
day it wee a continued cloud which enveloped us, and at
camping it would have been difficult for our most intimate
Friends to have recognised us, we stop't on a small run
of whitish water in which I tried to wesh myself its
depth about six or Eight inches, it wes a poor substitute
for a good Bath, but sfter the dusty day it cuite refreshed
me, 15 miles,

29 Sunday windy cool day remained all day in cemp.
had a good sermon, pulled some currents, wrote letters
for home to be sent into Taos or Santa Fe and wished I
was the besrer myself.

30 last neat froze pretty Keen, but the morning was
Clear & pleasént, Still, overcoats were in demand all the
forenoon, pasned along the Base of the Mountain within
from two to four miles over @ level plain covered with
the richest & smoothest short fine Gress 4 most brillient
green. Showing thet heavy rains mést shortly heve pre-
eaeded us, it would undoudtedly make the most delightful
sheep pasturage in the world the vaity appeared from
ten to fifteen miles wide & all presented an undulating Green
Velvety Lawn, Antelone & Hares were numerous the last
efforded much sport to the Dogs but were much toofleet for

. them. it would take a good Grayhound to catch them, they
bound slong with much grace & Agility, this is a lovely
valley bounded on the right by rocky mountains & the left
with precipitous Hills, the whole plain is strewed with
Buffalo bones but from the appearance of the Heads I should
suppose they have deserted it for the last six or Hight
years camned on the RicNlamehs a smal] stream 18 miles.

===== PAGE 041 =====
1849 The Grand Mexican Nation - Buffalo Hunting Page 41
Party - Kit Carson - Beautiful Lake

July 31 night bright & cool & day a delightful clear soft
sunshine, through this magnificent velley the snow
mountains show oscasionally te our right through the
first renge of mountains, the left round slosping Hills
quite green, Nooned on a branch of the Semmerone a fing
clear creek & pureued our Routeuntil\ evening when we
came in sight of a lerge Drove of cattle pacturing
supposed that some other trein was ahead of us. But on
a closer approech we soon discovered from the Herdsmen on
their mules that they were Mexicans, this was the first
sight of them & it by no means prepossessed me in favor
of their Nation, they were a dirty set of small insignifi-
sent looking mean wretches with still meener looking Mules
& Horses (if that were possible) one of the young men
who looked somewhet more Indian than the rest had what
appeared a most uncommon bulky rough looking Bear Skin
Cap which I step't forward to examine but discovered it
was hie natural covering & shedding apert with my hend at
onee geen that it was well tenanted. My curiosity went
no further in the examination. there is e Pueblo ebsut
two miles sbove our camo where some few Americans & this
splendid specimen of the Mexican Nation reside T had no
curiosity to vieit it. the young mans Head nut a complete
stop to my further investigations, I could not helo sey-
ing what a magnificent Valley for such Inhabitants, Taos
46 about forty miles to our Right About 21 miles.

Aus, 3 Morning ag usuel bright & cool. and this beautiful
Valley lay in quiet repose when the mornings sun shown
out, but in the distance along the base of the low Hills
we discovered a large party of Horsemen, We had formed
different conjectures, when three Mexicans rode up & inform
ed us that they were a large Hunting party from Teos &
neighborhood who hed been down on the plains Hunting
Buffalo & were now returning with the fruits of their
Expedition, they were certainly a motley assemblage,
Spaniards, Mexicans, Indians & all the different mixtures
& their dresses (if such they could be called) oresented
Equally as strange an appearance a Wool Hat & plece of
ea Buffalo Robe constituting the jarese of ene Whilst an-
other had e Spanish Straw Sombrsro, part of a white shirt
for what had once been one) large loose tnexoressibly
& his heels ornamented with huge spurs. the rowels, twelve
Inches in circumference & sufficient to goad an Hixapott-
amus to Death, those Varigated scortsmen were equally
Various in their Mounting & Housing, some were astride
of Jack Asses not much heavier than the rider others
on Mules & some on horses & Amcngst them were a few
splendid American Horses, the Hunters must have numbered
200 & the Mules Horses ete. upwards of Five hundred the
larger portion of them heavily loaded with dried Meat &
Robes, their line when travelling must heve extended 3
or 4 miles. TI now visited the new Rencho a Building by
the celebrated Kit Carson & a Mr. Maxwell, they have some

===== PAGE 042 =====
1849 High Elevation - Cenon - Gool Nights ~- Page 42
Hole in Prairies

Aug, 1 few American cerceantere at work and a number of Spanierds
moking the Adcbe&Ss the ohly Brick used in this country.
the intention is to bulld a sew & Grist Mill,;cultivate
a part of this Valley & I have no doubt that in « few years
it will vresent an agricultural appearance. our fore--
noons drive was over 2 hilly & somewhat rocky Road but
fine gress 411 eround, from an elevated Ridge we dis-
covered @ clear lake lying down in a green Velley & hy
noon reached if, we unyoked our cattle & let them have e
cool dyin of its limpid water it wag about two miles
Circumerence end gradually shelving, all the shore lined
with vich soft Grass the distant Hills some 3 or 4 miles
around «a few of them with ceaders singly end in clumpe,
all together it presented « delightful Landscane, it
wae the first Lake we had come across, a few duck sported
in its surface, this place will soon form the residence
of some Jover of the Picturesque for in no place have I
seen so many Beauties combined, the Lake has no outlet,
nor is there any stream running into it, the waters
pure & fresh, during the efternoon we ascended the high
Plains which notwithstanding their grest elevetion wore
a brilliant Green & gave us a most extended View, the
snowy Mountains on our Right & the Vast plains with their
numerous hills on our left and all sides presenting 2
veriety of forms, and every few paces changing their
appearance the whele was unsurpassed for mountain
scenery, a Canon (Kenyon) the first I had seen here evt
directly through a high mountain and drained a Valley on
the other side it was only 2 few yards wide but upwards
of one hundred feet deep, we camped on a wart of it where
the water was accessible, the evening sunny bright &
peculiarly mild the only drawback wes searcity of wood
but as usual for some time beck the Thermom&ter fell to
near the freezing point during the night. towards morning,
we regaled with a concert of wolves, about 21 miles.

2 we enjoyed an equal degree of beautiful Seenery to-

day & in fact if any thing superior the bold mountains
in the rear of Taos with their snow capt tons looked
grend, the rich grass over which we passed had a singulexs
Bluish green appearance, all the morning Antelove were
in large herds & at noon we Stored at the Role in the Pre-
irie a deep clear pool some three hundred verde long &
twenty orm thirty wide, the depth we did not ascertain
some of the oxen tumbled in & with difficulty were rescued
from a watery Grave, they were very dry, but scon found
they hed too much of it, Ceot.Phillips & self caught a
fine string cf sunfish which were quite « treat. during
cur Noonihg a smell compeny of U.3. drageons rode up & from
the officer in command we recd the first news from the
U.s, he mentioned 2 greet fire in St. Louis & the Burn.
ing of 28 steam Boats & some other particulers of less
note, how anxiously we looked for even a paper, the
emallest newspaper would have been Reed, Advertisementa

===== PAGE 043 =====
1849 View De Les Veges - Not Promising - Simple Page 43
Husbandry - Manners -

Aug. 2 of Quack Medicines & al] camped on the Mora. there is a
Pueblo nere inhabited by Spaniards, Indians etc. they
have yuite a fine corn field & as usual Irrigated, it re~
quires good guarding to keep our hungry cattle on the poor
Grass, when excell€nt corn is growing beside them & no
fence to prevent them from gratifying their hungry stomachs
24 me

3 left the Mora & in about twelve miles travel'd up a
gentle ascent. got a View of "Las Vegas" the first Spanish
Town lying in a beautiful Valley six miles below us. sur-
rounded by its corn, Beans & Pea fields. herds of Goats,
sheep, Asses, Mules, Horses, Oxen etc. scattered over the
green Valley, All presented a fine appearance with the ex-
ception of the Houses, which looked like a respectdble Prairie
Dog Town or like large Ant Hills flattened on the top. We
camped on a level plain about one mile from the Town & close
to their fenceless fields, it was a lovely evening & the
unusual scene was quite interesting young Boys in the most
primitive dresses were driving in their herds of Goats &
sheep, generally mounted on small asses, the goats were
beautifully spotted white & Black. Some of the youths showed
great feats of dexterity by occasionaly varying their
equestrian sports in dexterously sliding off the Donkeys
back bo that of some astonished long bearded Nanny. However
their stay on the latter was not generally long, but the
fall was not attended with much danger, the ground was near
& the grass soft, After supper about 20 of us paid the
Town a visit. the moon shown clear & bright the roads
level & smooth and after crossing a few water courses for
Irrigation purposes, we were in the Town about 100 mud
built flat roofed houses, but on a closer inspection some
of them contained large lofty rooms clean & neat & the
sentorettas tollerably well dressed in American Cottons,

A small company of U. S. troops are here. we spent some
two hours in rambling round by which time the inhabitants
had retired to bed if it can be called "retiring" sleep-
ing in the open street stretched down along side of their
houses. many a fair Senoran resumed a half sitting atti-
tude with her young little Mexican in her arms as the
Gurious Americans roamed around, the sight was new &
strange. the whole population of a Town (or nearly so)
all stretcned out in the clear Moonlight - I supposed
they were studying Astronomy. 20 miles,

4 Sunny bright morning quite a pastoral sight. the youths
driving out their large Flocks to grage on the peaceful
Valley. Lambs & Kids sporting & Skipping around & the
primitive appearance of the herdsmen, day, sun, Grass,
etc, all made it the most Scriptural Picture ever represented
to my View, the Maidens with the SKettish Rebosa around
the head, the Eye just sufficiently exposed to show that
Black & that of a Jetty Hue prevailed, the urn or water
jug poised with a Jaunty air on the top of the Head &
probably tne desire to please the wandering Americans

===== PAGE 044 =====
@

1849 Fandango - San Miguel ~ Pecos Church Page 44

Aug. 4 rendered them to us an Interesting sight. the most simple
Implements of Husbandry prevail and a general irrigation
prevails in fact so much so that all the settlements in New
Mexico are on the Beds of the rivers & creeks. this place
has the Greek so long diverted from its channel that it is
now almost nard to tell where its original Ghannel existed,
I visited the Rancho adjoining and in his simple garden
found goed Onions, Tobacco, etc, all in small beds & the
water much higher than tae place of their growth, I then
went into tne House & received the most politaattention
from its fair Senora Chairs of course tuere was none to
offer, but, 4 La Mexicana I threw myself down on their
turned up bed & there sat with great dignity. but having
no segar in my mouth I was soon presented with one &
smoked it (or at least tried to) with much grace it being
first lit in the fair lips of the senoretta herself who T
pave no doubt long afterwards thought of the Americano who
presented her little Papoose with its first Shoes, this
i done as a matter of courtesy & the expressions of both
Padre & hadre were of the most flattering Kind. during
the Stay of the train, I often availed myself of the lounge
their soft Mexican Blankets offered & there learned many
of their phrases & gtudied much of their primitive & simple
manners. I must say that as a people I love these unos bten=
watious, pretentious & soft flowing language. we purchased
some of their Taos Flour at 4% per 100 lo it is very
co€rse in comparison with ours but necessity compelled us
by this time we were getting low in the provision line.
Sugar was 25¢ per lb, molasses 4¢ per Gal & other articles
of Groceries equally dear. dry goods were at pretty reason-
able rates, at night a regular Fandango was got up when
all the Grace & beauty of the place assembled old & young
Gray hairs & infants at the breast, toe mothers banding
over their little interesting babes until they waltged
round in the arms of the bold Americans, the music one
Fiddle,one Guitar & singing all pretty good, at some of
tne exciting parts a general yell loud & long would drown
all tae obher music & the excited whirlers would spin round

: with increasing energy. it was extrordinary specimen of

tne poetry of motion, the Graceful movements of tne
Senoras & the awkward attempts of the Americans but all
passed of in good harmony,. on a table in tne corner stood
wine, Wnisky & Brandy sold by two fair senorettas at the
small sum of 12½¢ per Wine Glass full and this was the only
tax on tne dancers,

5 Sunday remained all day in tais pretty vally, but as
there was no church of any Kind in the place we rambled
all around the neighbouring hills & visited the different
Ranches. tables, chairs, Bed steads etc are all unknown
luxuries, Blankets are abundant & plenty and constute beds,
seats, etc, a few articles of Grockery ware well made and
of graceful shape are in every Housee

6 after loading our Flour we started & drove through
a Hilly Rocky Country, principally covered with Pine &

===== PAGE 045 =====
1849 Pecos Church - Dead Oxen - Gallistero Page 45

Aug. 6 Ceatr, but very destitute of Grass & water. Rocky Mountains
in the distence & precipitous cretgs raise high their heade
nooned at Tucalote & camp'd at Verdant Spring. 16 miles.

7 about 11 o'clock we passed San Miguel] a tolerable large
Town on the Ric Pecos, like ell we had seen Mud Houses &
flet Roofed. some of cur Boys stayed all night here at a
Fandango & gave a very flattering account of the urbanity
of the Inhabitants & fine forme of the Senorettas. indeed
they almost ssid as much ag that their Hearts were left
behing irretrixvably about 18 miles.

8 drove all day over dry sandy plains & mountains covered
with Pine & Ceddér,grass scarce, day Hot camped at even-
ing at the ruins of Pecos old Church where it is said the
Fires of Montezuma were Kept burning untilk within those
few years it has been e most extensive Building some of
the Puins are still 50 fest high & the carved roof still
retains meny cf its ornaments, it is built of Adobes, At
night « few of the men explored the ruins with torches &
dug up a part cf the floor which was found full of Human
bones one of the Mumm§s was in a perfect state of preser-
vation, Money was the chject of the digging but none was

: found. tradition seys upwards of 50 millions of Dollsers are
purxied somewhere in the ruins, all the inhabitents were
murdered by the Indians in 1680, there was once ® large
Town here as hundreds of Ruins ere still visible. large
cisterns remain, in the sand of the creek numerous small
Rubies were found, part of the Train who had seperated
from us had several of their oxen poisoned here it was
supcosed by Leurel about 15 miles.

9 a number of ovr oxen were this morning sick and during
the forenoon one of curs fell down & died (Tiger) he was one
of our most valuable cattle & his loss wes serious as we
had a difficult mountein to cross this day. however, we
borrowed 9 loose one, found 6 little muddy water at noon.

No grase. reached Gallistero at derk. cold & Raining.
it is a small place some 40 houses, about 20 miles.

10 but on Friday the 10th the whole town turned out to give
us a FPendango & by 3 o'clock the Room was full of the
Beauty & Youth of the place, we certainly danced our best
licks & there was some tall doings, but the floor was
occupied alternately by Mexicans & Americanos the fair
Senores nothing loath to, thirled round by the Northern men
& they soon learned ell the Cottilions & Corrutia Dences
for they sare ant scholars, I was anxious to Dance La
Mexicano & gave one fellow 2 pipe for his partner & the
fair Senoretts soon initiated me into #11 the mixtures of
the movement, it is a very exciting & pleasent dance & I
do not know that I ever spent 2 more agreeable evening &
night for dencing was Kept up untill morning. I visited
the Alealde & was much pleased with his kindnees his
house was well furnished, having a clock & some other
American furniture, his lady was a fet corly Deme & set
us down some excellent Brandy & Wine & cut Glass tumblers
all of which I found were recent ecquisitions to his

===== PAGE 046 =====
1849 Lady Alealds = Departure ~ Hot day ~ Stampede Page 46
No travelling on Sunday

Aug, 10 eetablishment, She was visitee by ® nelghbokring senors
& hoth very deliherately squatted themselves down Tailor
Fashion at my feet & tucked them in under & sat convers-
ing very gaily, I tried to mingle in their discourse &
offered them much emusement as they often lsughed heartily
put @isplayed the utmost anxiety to give me every pleasure
& information, I spent an hour or so most agreesbly &
Kiesed the tips cf the plump fingers of the Senorak at
carting.

11 this morning we made nrepAérations for leaving this
gay hospitable & pleasdnt little place, certainly we
perted with much regret from gue New Friends & some of
the boys under various preten&es contrived te delsy their
deperture & did not overtake cur train for some days, we
were told that water could not be found under 60 miles
excepting in mud cuddles & orcbably none of them, co as
we hac threes lone days drive without weed or water & but
little grass we had te gird up our loins fill cur water
Kees & prenairfourselves for a hot Mexican sun over dry
sendy pleing, we arrived towards evening at @ stagnent
pond where our dry cattle contrived te oartially elley
their thirst, but such wee the rush that it was soon con-
verted into e consistancy resembling north, the grass
was consequently very inferior, & here we remained untilds
evening 16 miles,

12 Sunday the dey was hot the sun burning & here we
lay roasting thinking on cool streame & pleesént springs
& nothing but soft werm water to drink, how we thought
of our friends at hone who had ncthing to do but ring the
Rell & a cool refreshing Graught was at hand, Well we
anticipated something of the Kind previous to starting &
were not diskappinted, in the afterncon we yoked up &
intended driving all night but had not proceeded more
than 8 miles when 2 etampede took place & about 11 wegens
dashed off over the plain with,much fury, after consider.
eble difficulty they were stored without much damege be-
ing done & we once more resumed our Journey but in a
short tans the same Ciarosition was manifested & we wera
reluctifntly compelled to corral. for the night on this
Sandy plaine without wood or water for our cettle, they
put & complete veto on Sunday & Night travelling. about 8 mi,

13 Morning sunny @& bright & started early. in about
8 miles we came to a stegnent pond. some of our very
daryest cattle swallowed a few mouthfuls nooned on the
dry plainae., some little grass but the cattle were
scarcely able te avail themselves of if however an
opportune thunder shower coming up was of service to them,
Artemasie olenty tedey & the flowers neculier to the
sandy ulains of the Arksnsés were here abundant, adreve
on tc 9% soring where we camped & had a tremendeave wet
night. my bed was completely saturated the atorm beat
throveh our tent & the water came in eround I thought
of home, but *% fine morning on the 20 MA.

===== PAGE 047 =====
1849 Poor Country .- Great Ruins - Wet Weather - Page 47
Feaver & Ague

Aug, 14 nut ug in considerable spirits however the sun shone
eo het thet we anticipated a repetition of yesterday for
towards camping time it litterally tumbled in avélanches
but we thought we must inure ourselves to it as this was
the Rainy Season in this vert of New Mexico, the country
was commaritively level & sandy, distence 23 miles,

15 arose off our wet beds & eat enything we could find
in the shepe of Bread made of Teos Plour (our American
flour was dene) Mr. Crendle consideretely sold our Flour
in Western M. I suppose under the considerate Idea that
wo might surfeit ourselves on such a delicacy & felt
perfectly satisfied no such result could oceur from the
Taos article, in half a mile we came to the ruins of a
Large Stone Church the most of the wells still in a good
state of preservation & I should judge 60 feet high, in
thickness they averaged from 4 to 12 feet perfectly smooth
but not chisgeled, some 2 or 10 Familes live in part of
the one side of it the most miserable looking mortals I
ever seen, the wild Arabs Issuing out of the Tombs de~
seribed by late travellers in Seripture Land I should
think were Gents in comparison to those cegraded Mexicane,

I have no where seen a descrintion cf those Magnificent
Ruina, it is rather an untrevelled Road from Galitestro
to Secore but I have never travelled over a Road which I
think would interest the antiquery equal to it, we are
now camped about 16 miles from the lost old Church and
another not helf a mile off is attracting the attention
of the curious of our Trein, I em too unwell (having just
get up in the wagon) now to sey anything resnecting it as
ebcut 4 houre prior I had a severe attack of Feaver & Ague,
the thunder is now rolling all around & heavy black clouds
indicate another Tempest, I feel unwell & will Lay down
on my wet bed, the evening turned out more pleasent than
expected & my Fever left me at dark so that I felt well
enoveh to stand the first wetech, 12 miles,

16 on the 16th I visited the Ruins of this old church
& village it has been en extensive edefice the church
alone was near 150 fest long, the walls in meny places
sixty feet high & in no olace less then 5 feet thick & in
some more than 12 there is many ruins all around showing
it to been a large place, it lies shout 28 mile to
the right of the road & was only discovered by chence as
Mr. H. Armstrong was shooting Rabbits, such stuvendcus
ruins I think have not been before visited or we would have
hed them described, a very small stream runs through the
vali & has been used for the purpose of Irrigating the
fields as the remeins of embankments are still visible,
on some cf the Rocks around P&eos Church are the marks
of Children & adults naked feet & different snimals have
also left marks, on & large Rock neer the first 014
church visited yesterday there was rudely cut the re
semblence of a serpent of huge dimensions & the tradition

===== PAGE 048 =====
1849 Ruins ~ Traditions = View of Ric Grand Page 48
Del Nort ~ Vegetebles - Pendangos
Aug. 18 rune that it required for its mornings repast a young
Indien Pepoose but the mother disliking ite carflbel pro-
peneatées stimuleted their valient Hushends to destroy it
& so the Church lest its virtues & consequently fell inte
disuse. by whatever visitation this region of Country
suffered it has certainly been lately depopuleted (when
I say lately I should suppose within the last centuary &
half} for Ruins of extensive dimensions show themselves
in all dirkctions & now all that remeins in those vast
Ruins inhebited by e few oocr Mexican Shepherds with their
floaks of Sheeo & Goats, the Contrast must strike the
reflecting mind & give us nevse to think of why & when the
destruction of the inhebitants who have left thoae "Palaces
& Piles stunendeous of which the very Ruins are tremendgouc"
at noon we helted at s spring if a few drops felling cver
@ leéze of Rocks can be called such but as this was the
only place where we conld obtein weter untill we reached
the Ric Grand Del Nort about 30 miles off we unyoked our
cattle untill evening & then pushed through the Senon &
down the mountain the View from the too wae beeutiful,
the evening fine, the River some Twenty miles off & the
broad green valley surrounded on all sides by mounteins
rendered it a charming sight. we drove until\ near ten
o'oleek & lay down along side the wagon without any tent,
it reined in the night & I got somewhat wet, about 16 mi.
17 sterted early and drove over a dry & sendy pishr to
the Rio Grand which is here about one hundred yards wide end
full of sand Benks quite Red, I think all rivers in this
eountry deserve the nene of Rio Colorada, the bottom is
pretty well cultivated and numerous Ranches are scettered
Along it, we hed much trovble to keep our tired & hungry
Gattle out of thelr fenceless fields. Corn ig now large
enough for Roasting ears & the orice is 25¢ ver Doz (Dea
Reals) & Onions &¢ each but they are very large. Grapes
about (queter Pacec) 4% ner Bushel & other things equally
/ dear, our Camp is full of the dark Senorettas, Selling
their Vegetables & Fruits & teaching us Mexicano, #® small
town is within a mile of our Camp (A¥ora) & a fine fan-
dango Room, the Gost of Music & lights would be (cuater
Paces) & the fair senoras & senorettas thrown in, a few
of the train visited it & Spcke fevorably of the treatment.
18 miles, -

18 On the 18th I visited it & found it a new Clean town
& some fine Rooms one man was just finishing the white ‘
washing & ag I was passing along T bid him Comme Se Va
Sener when he invited me in, oresented me to his Senora
& produced a small bunch of fine Grapes, there is quite
number of Vinyards here of course all fenseless, the
Grepes are good but they ask most exorbetent orices for
them, Streams of water runs all through and around the
town, it is quite picturesque to see the females filling
& carrying their urn shaped Pitehers poised gracefully on
the top of their heads the never failing Rebosa closely

===== PAGE 049 =====
1849 Windows - Swallows - Bon Repose ~ Indians Page 49
& Mexicans «~ contrasted - Furniture

Aug.18 foldeé around the head but still sufficient room left for
the guotetsish Black Eye to ceep out & discover a roguish
twinkle to the passer by - some of the windows possessed un—
usual pretensions to elegance having very coarse wooden
frames filled with Isinglass,as a substitute for Glass

: the others were either withort the eid of foreign ornamant

or arohably the under dress of a fair sencrak ves trensnAr-
ent enough to anawer, Swallows have free ingress & Egress
to their houses threugh the windows & possess themselves
of the most secred places ,even the Diadem of the Holy Virgin
is not exempted from their visitations but I believe they
ere the cnly creatures suffered to approach this constant
Household Ged without showing deep & increased Reverance,
they ere never molested & keep up a constant twitter through
the Room whilst the roof is fancifully ornamented with nests
containing their young, along the Rosd today I discovered
numerous small piles of stones, I was informed that it de-~
noted where a man had met rather » sudden Death, the fre.
queney of those sffectionate memoriale for the dead by no
means convinced me that the security in travelling waz in.
creased, but it must he congolitary to know that should you
meet one of those sudden misfortunes that flech is Heir to
by coming too quickly in contact with a Mexicen StilSetto or
some unknown & unseen weancn, you will heve a stone heeped
on you by every chense pesser by for the nurmose I suppose
of keeoing you quiet, we samped towards evening at the
Bese cf o high Rock near the small town of Tetys my tent
was quite close to the Rack where it rose 300 ft above cur
heads, the Grass wee good, day very warm & our Road through
@ deep sand. 19 miles today,

19 Sundey, we remained in camp all day. exceedingly warm
untill about 3 otclock, Visited by numbers of the Iotyan's
all ages & sexes = some of them pretty well dressed others
eimost in Natures covering, in this respect the pure
Indien shows more delicasy than the Mix't Mexican 93 the
young Females amongst the former I found invertably cloxthed
whilst among the latter they were frequently in a state of
perfect nudity, but "beauty unadorned adorned the mest",

I vieited the Town during the sfternoon & found the Houses
clean & neat, indeed their furniture by no meens prevents
you from having 2 full view of the Walls & Floor as it only
ecnsists cf the Bedding rolled up neatly againet the Wall
on one side & the end, it forms a soft warm couch. one
Planket As left extended out from it by way of carpet &
here your renose a 12 Turk, a pitcher & glass generally
oceupy one corner, the walls of course sre ornamented with
the Virgin & some favorite Saint, a few pieces of colored
paper cut ag rosetts connected together by a tape are nailed
round the Windows top. the Virgin & Saints & this (if the
owner is rich) with a locking Glass & Crosse form the
ornament of the room, the walls ere inverisbly white,

with a brown Streak near the flocr for surbase, the Joists
as T have elsewhere remarked sre ornamented with Swellows
nests, during the time I was lounging on one of those

===== PAGE 050 =====
1849 Saint Anthony ~ Presents - La Toya — Page 50
Fiesta . Troops ~ Apache
Aug. 19 divans en 974 man with a bag on his shoulder entered.
he was preceded by a Senora carrying something that
looked very much like 2 clock case, the Lady of the
Youse met her at the door & with deen humility received
it & carefully carried it to the end of the Room, placed
it on the sofa (if the Plankets cen be called such) &
drop't plounly on her Knees before it, where she remeined
about 16 minutes. The husband then presented the old man
: with a head of tobaece & his senora tock vp the Saint &
carried it to her next neighbor who I suppose went
through an equally Pioug expurgation, I found this was
St. Anthony. he wes 6 respectible looking wax seint
ebout 18 Inches long, well dressed, 2 long beard & in
his hand held a little wax figure about 4 Inches long
the owner of this Holy treasure wes otherwise poor & in
: this Pious wey he levied smell contributions from goed
senorans, his hag was well filled, I sat & smoeked
several cigarxetos were lit by the Hostess own fair Lips
for this distinguished hospitality. I mede her the
munificent cresent of 6 nins & 2 needles, this valley
extends from 400 yards to 4 miles wide & in some places
presents good grass, the naked & bear send hills come
down on both sides & the only pasturage found is immedi.
ately on the Bottom or elee back on the mountains where
their cattle ete are generally Kept two or three
shephards sufficing to keep the flocks belonging to the
Village for the time being, the milk Gost & Sheep being
only retsined at home,

20 dreadful Rain last night. we sent three Mexicans
down the River for @ small Boat or verdegue which belonged
to the place as we considered this the best crossing on
aecount of bad Roads intended to remain untill Tomorrow,
Visited the town once more was well. & hospitably
receatved, The grandce of the burgh invited me to his
House, the rooms were very clean, neat & well furnished,
two settees of Mexicen Menufacture & two chairs do, rather
goarse to be sure but then there were niles of the softest
finest & most beautiful Mexican Blankets of Gey bright
colers to lounge on, the Holy Virgin looking down most
benignently on you and all inviting to repose. the tempers
ture cool Thermometer down to 70 & outside the fierce
vertical sun I could not resist the Kind invitation of
taking a siesta so by the time T had completed » couple
of cligerds my eye lids drooned & I had a sweet refreshing
sleep of a couple of hours, When TIT awoke a dragoon
sompany from Santa Fe were in town on their way to El Paseo
thence to Fort Smith on the Arkansas for the purpose of
exploring a new routF the officer in Command,Lisut, ——
Kindly offered to teke letters to the states, I returned
to tent & wrote two letters one to my dear Wife & one
to my Brothers which I hops they may receive it was
almost conveying me home once more T sat until& neer
morning writing them, as the troops intended starting
at break of day, reports heave reached us thet

===== PAGE 051 =====
1849 Avaches ~ Perrying « Promiscuous Reathing = Page 51
Swimming - Grateful Repast

Aug,.20 the Apaches have roved some towns below this place & drove
of some five to ten thousend sheep & Goats & number of the
man from this place have been called on & see went in
oureuit,

21 this morning we commenced Ferrying our goods over in

@ Poeropue. At two loads we generally conveyed the contents
of one Wee@won, the stream was about ee yards wide very
rapid end muddy much worse than the @issouri, about 6 feet
deep but falling very fast, we hod only a few loads crossed
when the fair Jottyans hegan assembling on the Banks & in «&
shert time I should think the town wes deserted for presently
the old & young were alec our Visitors, the dey was werm
the sun shown bright & all looked color de Rose the Senoras
& Senorettas emiled & leughed, TI thought thay were going
to treat ue to a Fandengo, when two or three of them
starting to their feet & going under the shede of a large
Cotton Wood tree ebcut 15 or 20 yerds off began to very
deliberately divest themeelives of thelr light ecavering &
presently the muddy Red Waters of Rio Grande had some
twenty fair senoras & esnorettas snorting in its weters.
the vroseeding looked rather odd to us but the senors seemed
to teke it as o matter of course or of every day occurrance.
for in e few minutes more, the females were in the minority
end certeinly there were some surious & to ue unigue feats
performed the aqueticx amusements continued through the
whole day & frequently 50 or 60 Mexicencs & Ameriseans
would anpesr all mixa't uc in en inextricahle heap the
soft white skin of some of our Boys sppeered to please
the Cheste senoras very much for they would make observa-
tions amongst themselves & voint to whichever pcssessed
the fairest skin & plumpest verson. in swimming they
eppeared pretty equally matched, Various contests came
off sometimes the senor & sometimes the senoretts would
win. in generel J, considered the females as rather the
most expert, prob¢bly I was partial and ae this was the
first specimen of New Mexican Swimming on e Grand seale
T hed witnessed I was by no mesns prepatred to judge im-
partially, the politeness of the Husbands was unequalled
by ony thing I could have conceived, for if his fair spouse
wae troubled with a Little responsibility he kindly took
charge of it whilst the Amphibicus Mother disported herself
with great agility & soirits, Sometimes the senoras would
place their hands most gracefully on the men$ shouléers
ani in thic manner swim all eround. then they were quite
willing to return the compliment by oresenting thelr fair
shoulders for the senors to rest their tawny hands cn, in
this wey they relieved each cther oceastonaly the amusements —
were varied by some expert diver riaing Neptune like in
rather on unlooked for place, however I must do the fair
senorse justice to say that they eceldom displayed the
leeat alerm or fear but reteined perfect possession of
themselves in the most trying situetions, they were never

===== PAGE 052 =====
18493 Affectionate Meeting ~ Sefely Across the Page 52
Pic Grande ~ Ruins of an old Town

Aug. 21 entirely divested of all their dress but retained some
envious portion although it was sometimes like "Nennys"
in "Tam © Shanter"~.those amusements delayed us some little,
but by gun down we had neerly all cur goods over, I camped
on the West cide of the River & had a comfortable grassy
couch, but wags much tormented by Mnsquitoss,

22 Commenced early & by 12 c'eleeck hed all safe acress.

goode, cattle, wagons, Horses, Mules, & Goats, some of
the Boys traded an old Trunk for three Milk Goats. it is
an addition to the vartety cf our CavAlcade if not te its
usefulness, we will load up thie afternnon & prepare for
en early stert Tomorrow, Whilst I am writing in my tent
on the River Bank, 3 couple of Mexicans are Bathing &
swimming within a few yerde of me, they are either lovers
or a loving Husbend & Wife for they discley the greatest
effection & fondness for each other & mutually assist in
the verioug menuvers which are neceasery te constitute
gooc. bathers. their evolutions were graceful & pleasing,
we purchased thres sheep which were Butchered in the most
emeditious menner & afterwards their intestines afforded
(as popeared) a greteful repest to their slayers, they
meanly striced them between their fingers and placed them
on the burning coals & in ® few minutes devoured then,
those New Mexicana are fond of visiting each other. 9
cerrata has just arrived from some short distance & stopped
e few yards from my tent. its contents three good look-
ing young women , three shildren,an old Men & Boy & pig tied
rovnd the neck by a etring underneath the carrata. a large
old Mexican Trunk inside containihs 2 few chickene, Gourds, |
earthenware pans, Jars ete & on too helf Dozen Blankets
covered by en om hide, their seats, some fine soft Gey
colored Riankets. I presume all their household furniture,
the old man addressed a few words te some young men on the
opoosite side of the River who as soon as they heard him
immediately divested themselves of their few clorthes &
plunged into the stream ewvam across & embraced the
senorar with much affection, one of the Fair Ladies
divested herself of her Rebosa which she grecefully wound
round the loins of one cf the young men, Another produced
half a handkerchief which the other young men apclied to
a@ similer purpose, the ladies scon cooked supper & all
sat down most merrilie until& such times as they could get
the Boat to cross the River. I stocd much amused to see
the undressed Dons, buffeting with the misquitoes who
were enjoying a rich vrepast on their tawny hides whilst
they were paying the most profound compliments to the
Ladies & striving to enjoy their hospitality. No voriva-
tione or sufferings could make them for 9 moment ceese
in their attentiona & they remained in close attendance
on them until all were safely across the Ric Grande Del.
Norte. JI believe they then dressed themselves,
By evening we had all safely loaded un & 28 the Grass ie
very good our cattle look well, Old Bob is getting better

===== PAGE 053 =====
1849 Ruing of sn 014 Town - Paints for the Face - Page 53
Face Wesh = Pulvidera & Semitas

Aug. 92 & a orospect that in a few days he may he able to work,
We need him much, deep sandy Roads, con the ten of the
hill near our eneammment are the remaine of en Ancient
town, Stone Walls, deep excAvations quantities of Pottery
ete ete,ell denote it to have been 9 large place. w cen
only conjecture when it existed, my suncosition is thet
it was long Anterior to the Spenish Race on this Continent,
It is evident thet there has been a Veleanic eruption
since the town was in existence as a vast chasm yawns
in the center & large rocke erg thrown uc. some that
lie deep in it have strange hy: ogluphicks eut on them,
ena on the precipice adjoining are’ other curious devices.
Roeks that heve tumbled down during the lapse of ages
end lie scattered arcund the Rase heave some of their .
sices strangely marked all cf which were evddently cut
when they stood in 9» perpendicular poeigdtion.

23 Bright, cool, charming morning. a number of our

Roys are net yet returned into camp es they went to Town
for a farewell. Fandango & when they seme to the River
side the Boat was absent without leave, where gone T
knew not, without some of mischevaous spirits of the
Cemp has spirited it off. they returned juet as we wore
reedy to stert and had the pleasure of wadding across by
way of a cooler & Washer. pagaed through numbers cf Ruins,
large towns heve occupied this Valley as far as TI heave
seen, Met an American Wagon drove by a Mexican, it con--
teined Six women & two children from appearence IT suppose
they were going @ visiting es their faces were all plastered
over with a kind of white stuff resembling white wash. I
fined this ig a usual method of protecting their faces when
travelling or expcsed to the weather but when going to
Church or a Pendango (whieh both frequently happen on the
game day) they wash it off. Some times they smear their
face with a red stuff which looks like blood which gives
them a most bloody & savage look but then when it is
washed off the contrast ig 30 great, the sweet senore
smiles on you & blandishas her irresistable & winning
Lures that you at onee feel in the presence of an Angel.
We passed two fine villages, Pulvidera & Sanitas &
obtained some superior Grapes & Onions. the former were
ripe & luscious & to us travellers much of ae treat fins
fields of corn surround the Towns 211 well supplied with
water, by irrigation of course, today I saw some fine
Pinks same as we cultivate in Gardens & Port u laca in
quantities altho in general flowers are not plenty
orobably the season is too fer advanced, yet I discovered
some rare & fine specimens, Cactus now Grows from 10 to
15 feet hich, the borders cf the River are generally Lined
with a few fine Cotton Woods overy place else entirely
destitute of timber but very Littles answers the New Mexicans
purpose - ne fences, no Boerd floors, little or no furniture
a warm climate, only needed for a little cooking & every
House hes a good oven, so thet in their Warm Adche Houses

===== PAGE 054 =====
1849 No Need of Wood - Manufactures ~- Page 64
Quiet Town Socorro - Enjoyment of Pigs

Avg. 23 fine flocks of Goats & sheep 2 few cattle sone Horses
& mules, their fine warm Blankets with their Churchss &
Fonédango&Ss I think they are the most heppy thoughtless
people I have eyer seen, go through a whole town you
gee no one pursuing any trade, the only busy man I
discovered was 6 Pellow making or carving the Holy
Virgin, Saint Anthony & some of our Savior & from the
epoesrance of the inside of his House which wes really
comfortable I should coneider he makes a good Business
of it. the Piety of the people vill alwaye sustain this
branch of the manufactures, a large new Church is bulid-
ing in Pulbarea, it will be a fine Building when finished.
in approaching those towns no steeples, cupclAs or Domes
meet your view. ell flat, Brown & dusky nothing cheer-
ing to greet your vigion, no commerce or Business, All
is in profound repose, the $tillness of the Sabbath nre-
vells, the streets (if such their winding & turning
lanes can be galled) sre elmost deserted. ® chance Senora
with 2 water Pitcher on her head or the never failing
Rebose eround, it ig almost the only object which
attracts the attention, true when turning some acute
engle you may atumble on a promiscuous assemblage of
ruminating Goats & sheep may not without their attendant
guardian the Watchful Sheph&rd Dog who quietly lays by
his cherge & eyes the white intruder, step forward te a
door the Kind Senora says "Entre Senor! presents the bess - ,
lounge for your acceptance lights a cigar with her own
lips presents it to the suritous traveller & every hosoita-_—
Lity that her amiable disposition can sugges’ is ready for
your acceptance, We ley all day within le miles of Scoora,
T visited the town & entered most of the Houses examined
their Furniture,Pictures ete. conversed (as well as I
eould) with the inmates & in every way tried to gain an
Ainsipht into thetr Menners, Customs etc, the town is
entirely surrounded with corn fields & Vineyards & it is
pretty difficult to form a correct estimate of the nunber
of inhabitants as the high court yard walls & the Peach
& Quince Trees shade the low Houses from View, However,
I slambered up on the flat roof of the church and from
that elevation had 9 fine orospect of all the Town &
surrounding country, I suppose it may centain three
thousand Inhabitants. it hes four small stores all put
together would not make a large assortment for one good
one, a pretty good article of wine is made here selis
at one & half Dellars ver Gallon, about 15 miles.

24 remained near the Town all day as some four of the :

wagons required more flour for which they peid 4¢ ver
100 or rather more as it was 64 per Fanaga, it is 4
coarse unbolted erticle but we are easily satisfied, the
guantity 15 all we want, Red peppers ere grown in every
possible place there & tobacco appear in Juxtaposition on
every side cf the streets, some few mud walle crotect
the corn in and arcuné the Towns but the poor luckiess

===== PAGE 055 =====
1949 Diminished Trains . Apaches = Grass + Page 55
Greene - Pat Oxen

Aug, @4 Pigs ere all penneé up & such pens some of them not more
than two feet wide by about 4 feet long, they pass 2
most misereble existance, Hunger & Ease if them can be
called pleasures they certainly enjoy but their attenu-
ated Rodies shows either a discontented mind or their

‘ enjoyrents adse not agree with them.

25 grove through 3 level bottom, the greater portion
of the way through deep mud & mire as it was covered with
weter for Irrigating their cern fields, the corn looked
well & the grass good, our cattle are in pretty fine
order vessed some good Ranchos & a smell Town San
Antonic, it was seid by, the Quarter Master at Socoxd
that about 400 wegons he@ already passed for California,
within ebouvt thirty miles of us there is ebout 100 more
wegons which will be about the last of the Trains this
season, our train ig now 18 wagons, some get disatisfied
with our pelice repuletions, others have privete disputes
in this way we have gradually diminished but some other
treins have been more unfortunate they have even resorted
to murder some companies- lossing two or three men since
sterting, Todey we passed a number of Graves, plies of
stone & 2 wooden Cross denoting the catastrophe, last
year the Apaches made a descent for murder & plunder.
the Mexicens showed fight & some five or six on each side
were Killed, those graves designate the place of repose
of the Valiant Mexicans, the neoole appear in great dread
& fear of thoss dering & predatory Indians givine us to
know that our scalos will adorn their wigwams, we ney but
Little attention to hose Raw head & Bloody Bones Stories
distencs below Soeors about 19 miles.

26 Sundey drove through » country similar to yesterday
with the exception that there were no settlements T
supposes from sppeerance that we are pretty much passed
the New MFxican Settlements on the Rio Grand, the grass
to day was knee high, a fine Red top, the surface in
places was entirely covered with Effloresence and the water
strongly Saline. in one place which I tasted it was quite
salt, the day was cool for the season & Latitude. camped
Early on the Bank of the river in good Grasse & a fine
cotton wood Grove, TT seen some soft Green Looking pusley
(I don't know how to spell the weed) as I came elong today.
the Goats Kent munching at it whenever it came within the
reach that their short rope allowed, now said I for some-
thing green, thet everlasting Tass Flour & Bacon shall
be garnished by a side dish of something verdant & sure
enough the delicious vegktable smoked on our camp stool
at supper, how often I think cf Home, the rich garden
vegetables cooke® in various ways, the smosking Potetor,
mellow Apple, Golden Peach, plums, cherries & what not.

I must quit thinking of such delicacies & only hove that
if ever this weary jcurney has an ind I may yet partake of
such glorious products of nature, psessed 6 or 800 Govern.
ment oxen quietly feeding & fattening themselves for the

===== PAGE 056 =====
18423 Ginger-PBread Plaine ~ No Running Water -- Page 56
Silex Oxen - White Woman = Natural Ruins
Ang, 26 ourpose as I supoose of strengthening the Sinews & thews
of Uncle Sams Warriors, go thet they can with grester
facility exterminate their Brothers of the various
roeming Tribes inhabiting thie broken Hilly, sandy,
Rocky, mounteinovs, Berren Country. 19 miles.

27 continued along the River bottom until& noon when
a orcejecting enur of the mountain compelled us to escend
the Heights & we found an uneven sandy road interseetad
by deep Ravines, T can compare it to nothing but an
immense Ginger-Bread plein, we no sooner ascended a
hill than a deep valley lay immediately underneath us,
In this way we continued toiling untill Night when we
encamped on a high Ridge without either wood or water,
our cattle much fatigued, 20 miles.

28 our Road this morning led towards the river but
in ne place during the day did we reach it, nor since we
came on ite bans hos one drop of Running water entered
it, with the exceptions of the irrigating ditches which
only returned part of its borrowed waters. the roed to-
day led over a similar uneaven Sandy desert. on the Road
we seen a dead ox end ea number of our own gave out. if
this kind of country continues our cattle will soon feil
end oh! it is sorrowful to seo the poor patient, meek,
docile, & obedient creetures reel & stumble & fall. not
a droo cf water to alley their burning thirst or recruit
their exhausted energies. what is to be done for those
obedient sleves! who have tciled near two thousand weary
miles for Gold grasging inhumen man! some ere eruely left
on those secortching burning pleins to @ie helplessly &
oropahly even before death to become in part food for the
prowling, geunt & sevage wolf - others not quite so far
exhausted are slowly & patiently drove into camp where
by & Little careful nureing = few more deys labor may
pe coaxed out of them - egnough for the present ~

a white woman greeted our astonished eyes today.
She is Mre Howard on her way (in Jackson's Train) with
her husband to California, I hops she may reap a golden
harvest sufficient to repay her for the toils & privations
to which such & lengthened Journey generelly gives rise,
passed some strange remeins of Vertical Strata of Clay
gravel & sand mix't up into a conglomorate mars the
surrounding sand & grevel hes been washed away & has
Left those eurious natural wells stending some thirty
feet high, in places two te ten feet thick it presenta
the apoeerance of the mud walls of a hugh castle in the
last state of delapidation camped late in the evening
on the Turbid River with ooor Grass & Jaded Cattle. :
about 15 miles.

22 Pemained in this poor camping ground all cay to
rest our cattle, if not te feed them, the sum shown
bright & strong & during the forenoon very warm, washed
a few shirts & stockings as we discovered 2 clear soring
at the Rivers Bdge, you may say that spring weter was

===== PAGE 057 =====
1849 Jewelry - Lizards - Ants - Ravens = Page 57
Bugzards - Gow Birds -
Aug. 29 not quite the article for the Laundry Business but then
it was clear & that was sufficient recommendation, as
the river presents pretty much the consistency of half
thickened mush, with a slight shade of Venégtian Red.
30 cool morning. early start, deep sandy, Hilly Road
travelled with great fatigue to our cattle, if the day
, had been warm the consequences would have been fatAl to
many of them as water do&B not run nere at least not at
this season, but we often in the deep ravines witnessed
the traces & marks of it. & in their sandy gravelly, dry
beds 1 picked, up some beautiful clear bright ckrystals
resembling Dimonds & such they may be,as not an individual
in the train can determine their value,altho a man
possessed of the ordinary powers of vision can see
perffetly clear through them, if the Lapidary should
pronounce & Babtise them according to my wishes, my El
Dorado is found & I will ware a diadem studded with
Jewels of my own gathering, waat no other Prince or Poten-
tate can say--today I was much amused by the numerous
varigated Lizards, they measure perhaps from 5 to 10
Inches from nead to tail, inclusive. they are most grace-
fully proportioned, numbers of the creabures may be seen
darting round the small clumps of Artimesia or basking in
the sunshine, showing their glittering sides as they frolick
between the few spears of Grass wnicn those arid plains
produce, Horned Frogs are no rarity & like more troubles
frequently cross our path, Ants are found at all times &
in all places. We find even a difficulty on those wide &
boundless Prairies on wnich to spread down our couch at
weary even & often during the night the smali gentry gives
no proof positive boat we have not entirely avoided their
stamping ground by ocassionally inserting themselves in our
hair, ears, & other places wherever tney can obtain deacent
cover & food for the night. the ominous Ravens & Buzzards
have at all times been visible since we started but I should
think from the small benefit which they have derived from
the contiguity, that after so long a partnership they would
feel disgusted & witndraw, however in the passage ahead of
“Journada Del Murto” they may hope to derive sometning more
substantial. lI hope they may be dissapointed - but if tue
vicinity of tiose neatlds of Disease & Death are unpleasant
we are cheered by some of the feathered tribe a small
brown bird which hovers sround the train & occasionally
by way of change takes a pleas@nt little ride on the
oxen's backs & amuses himself by picking off, wnatever
troublesome flies may be annoying his Buchkipalus in this
way oaying for coach hire, but alas, the poor little
fellow sometimes lights on the wrong conveyance and a
churlish driver lays nim low in the dust. so much for
. misplaced confidence ~ there are but few Birds in this
part of the Gountry & wnat few there are I do not think
one of them possesses or has the least pretentions to
vocal powers, it is true the Dove coos, a little & but

===== PAGE 058 =====
1849 Jerboa ~ Rio Det Norte - Clear Water - Page 5&8
Election - Apache Country

Aug. 30 very little for I never heerd but one small moan proceed-
ing from one & I suppose its unfortunate mate had sufficed
for the supper of & hungry Hawk which had passed shortly
before, Hares & Rabbits odassionally shoy themselves
put few are killed, they lead the dogs a weary chase to
no ourpose--a beautiful little animal whieh T think is the
Jerhos of Serinture is also found here it shace resembles
a Kangaroo on 2 small seale . the animal itself not being
lerger then e Ret. the hind legs appear disprovortionally
long with 2 teil much longer than its bedy, it has large
pouches round the mouth or cheeks for the purposes cf con.--
veying the dirt to the surface, its Pack & sides are a
derk favm color, underneath white with two white longi-
tudinal stripes. they throw up considereble mounds cf
Barth, its Heir or Fur is soft smooth & cleen--about

. 15 miles,

31 country todey vretty much similar to the few
preseeding. deen sandy, Grevelly Revines & steep Hills,
surrounded on all. sides by broken Mounteins without
timber, Rio Grand Del Norte as far es T have seen has
neither Beauty, poetry nor mejesty or any association
which I ever heard of to give it a plece in song, Seve
& except the monody on the Death of Ringold & TIT em sadly
afraid this Poet never seen it or even his crolific
immagination could not have given it "Majesty", Oh,
wonderful! we this evening Crossed a clear running
etream, the first we have seen for many a day & I
suppose our thirsty oxen would have drank it dry but
after remaining et it almost an hour we got them to part
frem it with great reluctance, we filled our water Kegs
of course, as for cleer veter the thing wae something
new to ue & we also swallowed it in doses sufficient to
gratify the most ardent admirer of the Water Cure, in
fact we will now, prove invulnerable to all the diseases
thet femed Hyg#en’cen ward off. Pigeon Greek. we had an
election for officers for one month. I. C. Regers wes
elected Capt. I. ©, Armstrong, Lieut. my friends wished
I ehould be a candidate for office but I have always
ebjected to sinacures so I could not consistantly run -
the Apaches possess a country which I think no white man
would wish to dispoesess them of. Broken mountains, muddy
turbulent Rivers, and plains ete, etc, game searce & in
fect if it hes attractions they must lay high wp in their
mounteins, where both grass & clear water may exist in
abundence but we have seen nothing enticing. 12 miles.

Sept, 1 left Figeon Creek early & snother wonder greeted us
during the day in the shane of encther running stream
which beth were of recent dete from the appearance of
the banks & would be of brief durability. Probably two
or three days - they had cnly descended from their Father
® heavy shower in the Mountains a few days & a few more
would exhale them, country similar to yesterday. we ere
still vroceeding on our Journey but from apoearance still
remaining in the same place the everlasting sand Hills.
up & down, "ie King of France marched up the Hil? with
40 thoneand men, what then? why he marched down egain,

===== PAGE 059 =====
1849 influence of Females in Travelling = Page 59
Hot Sun - Travelling Without Water

Sept, 1 We march up, whet then? we merch down sgain, we loft a
large trein of 28 wagons this morning composed of Men,
Women, Girls & Children encamped on the stream ell the
Females busy washing. how we envied the happy dogs whe
possessed those best and Choicest of Heavens Blessings
to cheers his tent & share his couch on those wild decarts
they had 3 fiddles in their train consequently music &
harmony, singing & dancing vreveiled - this hapoy Har.
monious train vas under Capt, Turner from Mo, we encamped
neer another Train this evening who hed just stopped a
few minutes nrevicus te our arrival, from some unhappy
cause or other they had a querrel amongst them when one
of the men got mortelly stand. the dirk going in at his
shoulder & out at his breast. he ig atill elive, Berrys
trein elso from Mo - this train has no Females ~ draw
your own inference - we have had some little bickering
in ovr own cormmany but it never amounted to more then a
few loud words, when weary, wet, & fatigued we have come
into camp ro cheering Female Volee to great our ears,
no smiling scothing Noman to Spread out our seanty supper,
no little cherube te beguile, a emile from our serious
faces, whet wonder if we should not heve been so amiable
& agreseble as mortals niaced under more favorable circum.
stances the only wonder is we have been so harmonious
but then a little comfort outs us in the hest of temper
a tin cup cof Hot coffee & a pine of Tobacco these are
the luxuries of the traveller - about 16 miles.

2 Sundey remained in Gemo all dey. hot Burning sun
strongly reflected off this glering sandy soll. put uo
an syning along side the wagon & tried to weo a cooling
breeBe & not entirely in vein as at night we were still
alive but we ere like the Hels in the Frying (we are
getting used to it. towards evening Turners Train of
Wagone camped within half a mile of us thus three trains
are now all lying in sight I should think rather a rere
ene in the Apache Country. the united number of wegons

: shout seventy-five. however we will Keep as much apart
as possible, #0 as to have ® better distribution of
Grass & Water,

3 Started before day as in seven miles we hed to leave
the Rio Grande Del Nort & if I have my health & plenty of
other water to drink, I hope I may never more see its
muddy turbulent Red Slimy ugly stream it le true our
vrosoects ahead untill we strike the Gila are none of the
most promising or flattering. Sterile sandy, unknown
clains or nearly so, Lie before us but then we have them

. to cross & the sooner the better, we wish to teke what
advantese we can of whatever ponds or weter may present
themselves & for this reason started in advances of the

° other trains, we stoped in a valley emongst the Hills
to Neon but could find no water nor could cur cattle obtain
. one droo where we left the River ss the Benks were deep &
precipitous, so we yoked up & tolled under a burning sun,
It was so hot thst it actually blistered the backs of my

===== PAGE 060 =====
1849 Broken Axles —~ Ducka - Fever & Ague ~ Pege 60
Good & Bad

Seot, 3 Hands, TI ynrotected my face by slouching my hat. our poor
eattle crawled slong with Tongues henging out, the road
was Hilly & rough & on a sidling rocky Bluff we broke our
hind Axle but by great care & patching up we contrived to
get into Camp sbout an hour efter dark & unyoked at a
ecuple of Ponds whare the oxen made e tremend&ous rush & ‘
after some time 211 obtained sufficient to allay their
thiret., one of the Ponds we kept sacred for ourselves &
altho pretty hot as you mey suppose under such a sun yet
we thought it delicious,by. way of Parenthesis I would say
let no man buy a vagon from Spears of Peoria if he can
obtain one elsewhere & if he cannot let him do without one,
there was 6 of his make in our train & they ocaAssioned more
éeley ten times over then ali the rest es we had to keep
econtinuelly mending them - our front sxle tree broke et
Green Horn = distance 20 M.

4 I arose early & went to the vond for water the day
was just breaking, & light sufficient to show me 19 Widgeon
flosting within a few yards, I returned te the tent &
obtained my gun, Walked Gown & deliberately fired at the
unconéious ducks & killed six. Neo's oseunation head
returned & he soon laid them at my feet. the boys at the
Cem killed the remsinder of the flock — they show little
or no fear of man, but T was not like Robinson Crusoe -
their temeness was not shocking to me, cur wagon was
repeired by 10 o'clock, the road was better than we had hed
for a long time prior. camped early on a few Ponda the
Weter sulph&ry, Altho the day was looming het it was not
sufficiently so to prevent me from taking @ severe chill &
Fever, I remeined all night very unwell but commenced heavy
on Osgcod's Chologogue. Feaver & Ague & travelling in a
loaded ox wagon in the latitude of New Orleans - or nearly
60 - cool drinks are cut of the question. we can scarcely
obtain sufficient pond or puddle weter of the worst & most
insipid Kind, Nursing & care of course none, these are the
trials which bring Home & all ite endearing sssoctations
strongly to the mind, Alas! how little do we enpreciate
those Domestic Rlessings when surrounded by 211 we hold Dear
& Enjoying health & abundance of the gifts of Providence,
No! No! let him undertake such a journey es this uoverds of
three thousend miles ~- the way we heve & will travel with ox
wagons, burning sun, sendy plains, bad or no water ~ & the
other privations & then if they "the deys that are gone" do
not rise befcre his mind's Bye, he did not have a hevpy home
& en affectionete Wife, Put then if we heve difficulties we

. have our enjoyments & pleasures, variety in ssenery every day
greets our eyes, Majestic Mountaings, Level Plains, Verdant
vallteS & some times clear streema a new & varied succes
sion of flowers every day present themselves to our view,
the vartous wild Animals & Birds of beautiful plumage inhabit
those extensive regions as yet but little intruded vpon by
white men, All these & thousands of other of the gifts
of nature sre lavishly & with an inspiring hend spread
out before us. A grand serenede of Yolves by no means

===== PAGE 061 =====
1849 Mimbres Mounteaina - View - Caterpillars — Page 61
Ceetus = No Yeter
Seot. 4 assisted me during the night - in woolng repose ~-
about 14 miles,

5 Arose this morning with anything but @ disposition
to enjoy the beauty of the rising Sun & the splendid
Landscape spread around, the Mimbres mcunteins all Broken
& scattered into fantastic Peaks & strange Wild forms,
the immense beuldere & burnt blocks of Lava scettered in
every direction showed conclusively that fire had been
the principle agent in their formation, Some of the
Hills were beeutifully dotted with solitary cedars of
from 12 to 25 feet high voerfectly circular & each one
would have been en ornament to the most tastefully
arranged Garden, the Road wound through the mountains
until& evening when we obtained a charming view of sone
40 miles in a south west direction, the Hills & Vellids
in the setting sun presenting a delightful Landscane ~
the forenoon had heen very hot & no water for our thirsty
cattle until& about three o'clock & then e quagmire
oresented itself with considerable digging we obtained
a suffieclency of very muddy thick water to allay their
burning thirst. the 8 oxen in our Wazon drenk upwerds of
100 Gallons ~ the Idea of hatling water over pleins for
oxen is prepcsterous - the Grass since leaving the Rio
Grande has been covered with a large rovgh ceteroillar
looking worm from 2 to 4 inches long cf ® yellowish color
we feel aoprehensive that it may make our cattle sick ~
so far no bad effects - Camoed shortly after dark without
water, 20 miles,

8 Herly start, Roed over 2 comparative Level comosed
of hard cley & send covered with Round burnt stones very
severe on the Oxens feet @ round speery Kind of Cactus
very Plenty with a tall straight stem in the center 15 to
20 feet high with bunches of seeds near & sround the top.
it makes e good fishing pole, Whic stalk or walking cane,
Various other Kinde of the Cacti species goundant =-
immense morning Glories es large as & conmon saucer found
today - Mejor Convolvulous — camped shortly after noon in
the Rio Mimbres a clear stream, some of the other trains
arrived here & camped as the water was good. the man who
was stebed last Saturdsy hes since died of the wound,
the murderer is still in Custcdy it is not Known yet
what will be done with him. my Ague has not returned,

I keep steady at the medicine & I am in Gorsequenee tne
clined to pass what beauties the country may present with..
out much notice, 14 mileg. .

? this day was olessent & cocl & the Road good over
a fine teble Land with tolerable grass & surrounded with
mountains presenting every shape and form ever seen in the
same distance but running streams none, we found cne small
Stegnant Pond during the efternoon but our cattle would
scarcely touch it and at evening camped on a small elevation
without wood or water, a train is cemped within two miles
of ue a Mr. Gully Gant. two women & some children compose
part of it . distance about 24 miles.

===== PAGE 062 =====
1849 Grave ~ Scarcity of Water - Page 62
Night Travelling - Soap Suds Lake

Seot. 8 the same upilend kind of Road continued,
Ocassionally it wound its wey along & Round the Base of
Conical Mountains & then emerging entered on the level
pleins, in one place a small Orchard of Cactus presented
the appearance of good sized Apple Trees planted about
Equidistant, some of the Cactus have fruit which
resembles the Papaw both in taste & shape, only some-
what sweeter, pessed an Emigrants grave burried about
a month ago - he has 9 lonely resting place in this
desert Apache Country - travelled on all day but found
ne weter - often & often we thought we seen it in the
distance. some times deceived by the Mirage & at others
by a Blue Weed which grows in the hollows. in fact so
complete was the deception that even the sagacious "Nep"
has galloped off with great glee hoping to lap up 2 few ;
mouthfuls, but returned like many another dissapointed
Dog with his "tail between his legs" we drove untiik .
after dark & were only enabled to proceed by the vivid
flashes of lightening which reveeling the wagon in
advance enabled us toe proceed for some time, but were
ultimetely compelled to unyoke our Weeried cattle & tie
them to the wagon untilt the moon would show her modest
face, our mess had about one quart of water, we mede
it into coffee & slept without the least trouble from
overcharged stomeches or the nightmare, Supposed
distance 50 miles,

9 Sunday. up & off by two o'clock & the "yale cold
moon" enabled us to pick our way over rather a rough
spur of the Mimbres Mountains, I ascended one of them
just at day light it was Isolated & from its summit I
had as splendid a view as an artist could desire to
paint or a lover of nature would wish to witness, T wae
in ea complete Ampitheatre, Mountains surrounded me on
all sides some 40 to seventy or Eighty miles off but
that one grand requesite was wanting without which no
Landscape can look well ~ I mean water in vain I looked
in every direction, Hills nlains & broken mountains on
every side. About one O'clock we arrived at a shoal
Lake, water in some places about an Inch deep, it is
set down on Cooks Map as a dry lake but a recent shower
has caused a little red water to settle in it, which our
oxen Sucked at untill TI thought they would burat. Such
scampering for the muddy fluid I think has rarely been
seen except on the Desert of Sahara however all got

: sufficient. Grass tolerable good but this soap suds
water did not annear to agree with the oxen or else
‘ being so long without water they drank too much of this -
20 miles,

10 our Road today was over a deep heavy scil for the
first & miles we then escended the mountains and pro-
eeeded slowly over rather a stony rough pass, high craggy

: Rocks & ocassionslly Conical Hills with a few caders &
Burr Oak on each side, some large Aloes with center stem
of 25 feet high of the most splendid appearance were fre~-
: quent drove untill near ten Oclock but found no water &
as the night was dark we were obliged to stop Camped on
the Plein 17 mi,

===== PAGE 063 =====
1849 Quail =~ Rolling Rocks - 3 Trains = Page 63
Murderers - Sun Flower

Sent, 11 Started before day & in a drive of 3 miles came
to e& Creek Bed with a little water oozing through the
Stones, but continued up about a mile & feund a run-
ning stream unyoked & turned out the cattle for a
hearty drink of which they stood in much mud, I
washed up the soiled Linen if a dirty clay colored
Red can be called soiled, it was done in a very primi-
tive manner. Starch, Blue, Ironing ete I voted super-
fl¥ous even removing more than a small percentage of
the dirt, was likewise voted an unnecessary expendl-
ture of Physical Strength in this hot climate. One
universal color vrevails & enters into 911 cloAthing
s Bluish,Brownish Red. one of the Boys Killed 9 quatl
it was a most beautiful little Bird, wings marked
like a Guine hen, underneath a Velvety Black & on
the back the feathers were long resembling the
Hackles of a Red Game Cock, its size about the same
as in the states, Game of all kinds scarce or indeed
almost none, an Antelope or two has been seen, Smell
birds, None or nearly so. 3 miles,

12 remained in camo all day to rest & recruitt our
cattle, day occupied in repairing wagons. Washing,
repacking, playing whitest, Euchre, Cooking. high
rugged hille immediately in the rear of the camp
which reverbrate & Echo to the shots fired from time -
one amusement & indeed appears the principle one is
detatching immense fragments of Rock from the summit
& hurling them with thundering noise down on the plain
& into the bed of the Creek large sums of Californié
gold will change hands numerous bets have heen made
on the speed of the different fragments during their
descent --

13 Made rather en early start but on ascending up
the Valley we found the gress so good that we concluded
on helting at noon, the scenery was fine & a small
stream odessionally ercesing our Road rendered it more
pleasing than we had been accuetomed to for a long
time previous, three trains are now camoed in sight,
in 811 I suppose 250 men, the murderer is in a@ wagon
by himself as neither of the trains will permit him to
associate with them. he only came along last evening
(as the stabed man has only died a few deys ago) he
received 150 lashes on the bare back, he would soon
leave all our companys if the dreaded Apaches were not
® greater terror to him than even us. Sun Flower
attains a great height along this small stream, some
15 feet - other flowers sesarce - no wood with the
exception of some stunted Bleck Jack Oak, bold rocks
ocd&asionally oresent themselves on the benk of the
stream some of which hold handsome specimens of
Quart” spar ete. 13 miles,

14 remained all day in Camp, Strolled amongst the

: seettered rocks & collected some specimens of rare
flowers. I discovered some 15 or 20 round holes cut in
the solid Rock resembling a Druggists mortér, 10 Inches

, in diemeter & 135 inches Gee.
it ig evident that the Frétens exersss

===== PAGE 064 =====
1849 Dead Ox - Handsome Valley - Apaches - Page 64
Pass of Gaudelépe :

Sept. 14 Indians Express the juice out of some Kind of Fruits or
Roots & let it run into them, they are perfectly regular
in their formations & nust have cost those primitive
people a great deal of labor in the cutting.

15 Early Start up a beautiful wide valley with good
Grama Grass & a small clear stream, but in places the
road was very bad we sometimes had as many as 8 yoke
(16 oxen) at one wagon, one of Capt Rogers fell dead in
the road & some others were much exhausted. in my own
wazon we had but 3 yoke as "Stub* had injured his foot &
with much difficulty we got along with our reduced Team.
we passed & poor mule turned loose to die, he was a most
miserable object skin & Bone & not even all his skin for
if it had not been peeled from his lean sides for Whip
Lashes it had certainly been lashed off ~- he was a dis-
tance from water & I think he would never again wet his
burning throat as he was unable to walk, the wolves will
have a poor supper of him to night as they are plenty in
this neighborhood. howling Night, Noon & Morning - this
Valley is from 10 to 25 miles wide surrounded by nigh, .
bold mountains. altho green & presenting good grass not
a living object was to be seen in it with the exception
of one Antelope and a few Buzzards - all was still as
death when new & just from the hands of its maker it
could not have gresented a more peaceful & holy serenity
and this is the very center of the Wild Apaches that we
hear such fearful tales of blood massacre and violence
about that some of our timid adventures can scarcely woo
the balmy God & give their tired Bodies sufficient re-
pose, it is true we all lay down with our loaded Guns
by our sides but that is a practice which we nave followed
ever since our entry into the Indian country & I could no
more sleep without my trusty gun than I could have done
at home without my better half - but if I could make the
exchange of Bed Fellows I would run the risk of the
Apaches. 14 miles.

16 Sunday. continued our course today up this fine
Valley but the Stream had ceased. a dog Town covers all
the plain as far as I seen, about 10 o'clock we reached
the Yanos Road & Entered the pass of GAuddlépe so that
our Journey South has now reached the lowest point near
31 degrees, the day continued very Hot. altho the
Nights are always cool sufficiently so to sleep under
two or three blankets. the Road was over a succession
of Mountains, the most Peaked I ever travelled over or
I suppose any other man or set of men with wagons save &
except the very men who nave undertaken to reach the Gold
regions through this pass of Gaud@iddpe. I think during
the day we had not ten yardsof Level Road some places
the wagons were let down with Ropes at others it appeared
impossible that they could be lowered without breaking &
shattering every thing to pieces but by perseverance we
contrived to Let them down all the most difficult places.

===== PAGE 065 =====
f
1849 Bad Road = Beautiful Camp - Ganon - Over- Page 65
hanging Rock =
Sept. 16 in ascending we had equal trouble but by putting on as
many oxen to a wagon as we could get room for them to
gtand on we contrived to get over the worst of the Road
by sunset or a little before and encamped on & smail run-
ning stream after a most fatiguing day to our poor oxen
who were nearly all lame as the Road was of burnt Lava
Flint & gravel, but full of bright shining Quartz &
Curystals of the most brilliant & clear appearance,
Dinonds of the purest water could not nave shown brighter
& the sand of the Creek is full of an article resembling
Gold but which I suppose is Mica, it shines quite Bright
the mountains have a few scattered trees on them resembl-
ing a very thin old orchard, principally black Jack ~-
We have seen no living thing today except a few wolves
in the morning & two or three Ravens during the day,
about 11 miles.

17 I cannot help trying to &scribe our camp of Last
night & this morning as it was certainly the most beauti-
ful on our route for so far a small clear & cool stream

. rippled over a bed of shining smooth stones the sands of
which were either gold & silver or at least as bright
as if composed of those precious metals, difhonds of
the first water were litteraly in every crevice, or, 4
clear Quartz much resembling them, no enchanted stream
in fable ever presented the appearance of greater or more
unbounded riches to the Coter¢ of Manon than this Fairy

. rill. it flowed within about ten feet of the front of

my tent & on one side towered a large Syckamore of the
sharp pointed leaf Kind which completely overshadowed the
tent & just within reacn flourished one of the numerous
Cacti family which grows here in all situations. it was
some 15 feet high with a tall center stem of 25 feet
hanging with large balls of seeds, against it we piled
our Guns Riffles etc. about 400 yards in our rear towered
precipitous cliffs of about 500 feet high those formed
a complete semi circle & left just sufficient room to form
our Gorrél in. it was a smooth grsy plot & when our
Camp fires were lit up at nignt-& reflected against the
naked rocks & re reflected from the clear stream I thought

: I had never witnessed a night scene equal to it. the
white tents & white wagons, the numerous oxen, mules &
Horses all picketed round the corrél (since the great
stampeding we picket all our cattle) & in the distance
the Sentinals “walking their lonely roynd" all formed a
lovely, romantic & quiet picture, to be in the centre of
the wilde Apaches I must question if a more blessed &
civilized Gountry can present such romantic & captivating
excresences & in her own solitude she loves to dis-
play the veauty of her wondrous creations - it is a
stopping & resting place after crossing these rugged
mountains. as We see where bellows have been erected
for the purpose of reairing their wagons. the large
sycramore already mentioned is completely carved with names.

===== PAGE 066 =====
fe
1849 Chard Ground - Mexican States degenerating Pegs 65
“an the Vicinity of the Apeches

Sept. 17 in quite sufficient quantity to cause its death by
giving them a short lived notoriety - if the Apaches
ean read as T.think’ but few white men will ever be
enabled to enesk of their literary abilities ~- some
sre dated a month prior to this - our Road led down
the bec of the creek some 8 miles it was the first
place which fully realized my opinion of a Cangn, in
some places the Rocks overhung some 50 feet at the
height of 500 feet it wag sublime, immense Blocks
aopeared in the very act of tumbling down the wonder
was what supported them, I do really think one mans

/ strength with © Orow Bar would have dislodged some huge

blocks, some of the caves had been lately cecupied by
the Indians, their corn mortdrs had lately been in use,
the creek sank in the sand & we left ite dry bed and
ascended a dry arid plane some little grass & wild sage.
Horned Frogs, Lizsards, morantulae ete. plenty. the day
was burning hot & a fine ox fell dead in one of the
teams, Camped at night without wood cr water on a
hard stony soil where we covld not drive in our tent
pins & could Searcely find room to make our beds
amongst the hard round boulders, I wrote this nearly
in the dark distence 15 miles.

18 in shout 5 milea we came te a little water where
we unyoked our thirsty cattle & drove on te the Valley
& ruine of San Rernardino a good Spring rises in the
Vicinity of those Spanish remaine cf former greatness,
it has been an extensive place the ruins now covering
about a dozen acres & some of the walls 15 to 20 feet
high built of Adobes in fect sll the Mexican States in
the proximity of the Apeches ere fast depopulating, New
Mexico, Durango, Chihuahua & this stete of Senora, they
ere continually meking forays on them & driving off their
stock & carrying their women into captivity - I seen one
place where a battle had taken place between the New
Mexicans & Apaches two of the former and six of the
letter were killed, it ic but seldom that the Mexicana
attempt to resist then in general they take to their
Houses barricade the doore & vermit the Apaches to teke
black m@il without molestation thankful if their women
and children are left safe. Mr. Gully& train camped at
this spring sent out a party today to hunt wild cattle
they succeeded in Killing one, the wild cattle which
roam over those hills are the remains of the Spanish
Settlements, we seen some of the heads, the horns were
very large & undoubtedly the wild Pulls must he very
Savege & fierce if they still retain some of the And@lu-
sian Blood, one of them even the oldest & tuffest would
be an acceptible gift te our train as a continued feast,
daily three times, of rancid Bacon,Tacs Flour & etrong
coffee will even pall the Appetite, sc true it is that
even sweets will losse their relish, Pottery is found
in almoet every Place where we camo, it i¢ evidently
of Indien manufacture as they meke pcttery of the same

===== PAGE 067 =====
1849 Oxen & Wolves - Hot Day ~ Fatigues Pege 67
of Travelling
Sept. 18 quality & patterns at present in the Vicinity of Santa
Fe 8 miles

19 for the first 6 miles the read led up e gradual
ascent it then entered some high broken hills when we
found some water oozing through a red{sh soil at
evening we camped on the plain without water found
some small bushé for wood, 14 miles.

20 in the morning we found that our camp in the
center cf a plans és the mounteins ahead appesred equi-
distent from those we had passed during the forenoon
we came to a stagnant pend but sufficiently large for
ell our cattle to drink et once, but it wes soon: con-
verted into a thick mud, our cattle are now daily drop-
ping down, the lengthened Journey, Great Heat & spArce
grass begins to tell fearfully on their attenuated frames,
we left 2 behind yesterday and this morning Mr. Crandle
shot one cf his rather than have it devoured alive by
the Wolves We vassed one poor Ox (left by some former
train) who was still alive, but his hind lege were
partly Xhewed away by the cowardly wolves, the brave
old fellow was still fighting them off with his Hornes
but their numbers would in a short time put an end to
his misery, on cur approach they 911 sneaked off to a
distence, but they wovld soon hasten back and gorge
their villansous carcases with his quivering flesh. the
day was beaming bot and I walked in advance of the train,
but in 6 or 7 miles the heat became so oppressive that
I tock the grateful shade of a large Cactus & under its
large & pointed leaves enjoyed the cooling bree untild
the arrival of the train & then pursued our weary way
until& Evening & Camped without water, about 14 miles,

20 in about 5 miles we got a little stagnant water
which partly served the exhausted cattle for a drink,
the day was as usual blazing hot, but onward still we.
slowly plodded, I do not recollect o day since starting
in which I endured so much fatigue. I had no Horse, Cur
eeattle were tired and another yoke gave out so we were
reduced to two yoke & of course riding in the wagon was
now &® thing not to be thought of, so I cut for myself 3
fine Cactus walking stick & depended on it when not
driving... thought cf Home, Gold digging & various
other exhilerating immaginines & with Castle Building
& Blistered feet reached a camping Ground on some red
pond water covered with a green thick slime of which we
manufactured a rich golden colored tea & a little fat
pork & Taos bread furnished us an exquisite but not
unusual supper, about 17 miles,

21 drove about 14 miles & came to a small rill (@sn
areek) & in some places sufficient water for sll our
cattle so we unycked & remained all day in camp. Summers
& Barman went shooting and returned after Night saying
they had Killed two fine Bulls but as we saw none of the
beef we were rether sceptical, the encampment was on a fine
elevation & in the distance mountains surrounded us in all

===== PAGE 068 =====
1849 Handsome Grasshoppers - Magnifying Page 68
Atmosphere = the Dr's Bull
Sent. 21 directions. Rocky & devoid of trees with a few excep~
tions of small stunted Oaks, 14 miles.

22 last night wes wet & this day continued cool &
our Poad led through a good grass country, I started
phead of the train & enfoyed some fine Views from the
summit of the mountains, once in the distance I seen
a few wild cattle but the horses of our train were too
much reduced to hunt them with success, large Grass- .
hoppers of e beautiful bright Green with rings of orange
& black are now very numerous, they measure upwards of
4 inches in length, but thetr action & activity are by
no meene in proportion to their size, they furnish the
principle article cf food for the Wolves. however
strange this assertion may appear, I am convinced it
is a fact ~ at evening we camped in good Grass & some
few small Oak trees with pretty good water. 14 miles,

23 Sunday, lest night was extremely cold, I stood
the morning guard from 2 0 clock & I certainly considered
we had a oremature winter, I had my double Blenket
wreped around & would have become an easy & rich prize
to an Apache as IT felt but Little disposition to resist
an attack, the morning was bright warm & clear the
distant mountains presented the most Gigantic outlines
with their heavy clovds resting on them. in this magni-
fying atmosphere but on a nearer approach their altitude
was considerably diminished, we nooned under a large &
lone cotton wood no other trees being within miles of
it & even them that were on the mountain sides were
atunted Black Jack Oask, a little stagnant water but
so bad that our oxen would not taste it, drove to what
we considered the Rio San Pefro & camped, 19 miles,

24 as usual night cool morning bright & clear shortly
after sterting 29 Mexican soldiers passed us. Stating
that they were out hunting Apaches & Wild cattle, they
had killed some of the latter but were not successful in
Begging & sealping any of the former, as they are getting
rather shy & weary on account of so meny American Riffles
passing through their country. A Dr. Wink! of our
company discovered what he considered a wild Bull & with
great caution apsroached within sbout 40 yerds when he
took deliberate aim at the devoted Brute & fired his un-
erring Riffle. down dropped a tolerable fat teme Milch
Cow. the Dr, fled but when we came up with the train we
thought her too delicious a morsel to be left for the

, Wolves, so we skinned her & divided the beef amongst the
train, unyoked our cattle & determined to devote the rest
of the day to feasting, but we were soon interupted in
our Jollity by the srrival of a stranger with 4 most
rueful countenance who inquired if we had ssen a heeuti-
ful spotted milk cow, his favorite "Spotty" which had
been inadvertantly left on the previous day & his wife
& children were all in a state of the most anxious sus
pense & Gistress on her account. indeed the youngest

===== PAGE 069 =====
1849 an Irrepadreble Loss to the Owner = Page 89
Handsome Country ~ Metals ~ Ascend the Mountain
Seot, 24 portion of the femily had been deprived of their usual
nourishing food since her mgatertous disappearance,
it was impessible to deny the horrible fact as there
lay the beefless bones & indeed our very Jaws were
pusy at the moment masticating part of the luckless
cow as it had been pert of a human being & us a set
of Cannibals, his surorise & Horror could not have
peen greater but the deed was done and the only
repAration in our pover was to try & console him with
a little of the needful, he accepted our offer but
declared the mines of California cowld net repair his
loss & te hie children wealth was unimportant, Milk
alone was the great Pandcea =~ the man had been unfor-
tunate he had lost 2 horse & two mules previous to
this last & worst loss, We oitied him but could do
no more, 4 miles,

25 delightful day & drove over a rolling country of
rich good Grama Grass, since our first entrance on the
head Waters of the Rio San Pefro the country has been
delightful a chain of rugged mounteins in the distance
sparsely covered with a few wide spreading trees
As we approach the mounteins however they lo&se con.-
siderable of their altitude but their romantic beauty
continues, we passed two or three deserted Ranchkes
some of the walls still in 6 gocd state of preservation
& at one of them.large piles of melted metal resembling
lead or silver. it appears to be the dross of silver
& ag we cre now in the gold & silver region no doubt
it is part of some of the precious metals ~ but we are
bent to reach California & the train will not stop to
examine & in fact we have no time to waste as our pro-
visions ere running low & still a long journey in
advence our camp is in a beautiful little Valley.
Rocks of various shapes resembling castles, towers,
Domes & bettlements & indeed all the shanee which a
fertile or even a conén immagination could picture,
all are here et one sight. some lovely little secluded

‘ Glens, with wide spreading Oaks branch cff in every
direction but all ite lonely & still not the smallest
vestige of human beings having ever trod the soll with
the exception of the Grass grown deserted Ranchos &
they add to the wild lenliness of the scence = dead
oxen now present themselves rather too often to be
agreeable to us weary travellers ~ it rained heavy
during the afternoon, distence about 15 mi,

26 I started early in the morning in advance of the
train which lead up a fine rich valley presenting very
much the appesrance of an English Landscape only thet the
surrounding mountains were more rugged & bold in their out-
lines, the Road soon began to ascend the mountain and
after about an hours clambering over Rocks & rolling
poulders I gained the summit, the View was magnificent,
I set & enjoyed it some time & then collected a few
fine specimens of Quartz etc. and descended the
Opposite side it led down thrgugh @ rich & Bold.
scenery over hanging rocks toyed with spreading
Oak & pine & through a Cagon where there

===== PAGE 070 =====
1849 Fright - Mexicans ~ Santa Cruex - Page 79
Cultivetion = Soldiers Dress

Sept. 26 was not six Inches more room than was required by the
Wagone the Rocks on each side some 3 or 4 hundred feet
perpendicular & indeed overhanging. I continued untill
I reached the Valley, selected a fine Cak Tree under
which I Kindled « large fire as the day was Chilly &
some burning brends were laying around a train having
camped here last night, the day was cold & showfy, but
beside my blazing fire & "the last new novel" the Bush-
Ranger in my hand I enjcyed myself very well I soon fell
fast asleep & enjoyed a sound Nap for some time how long
I can't tell but my faithful Sentinal set up & most tre-
mendeouge barking. I jumped to my feet & thought the
Apaches were up on me & the worst of all my only weapon
was a Cactus Walking cane, but as good fortune would have
it, it was only a few peaceful Mexicans, a "comme is
ve" & a shake of the hand soon formed a lasting friend-
ship. I presented them with a piece of tobacco (an
article I always carry altho I never use it) end in
return they handed me a cigaro which I smo&aked with
Spanish gravity, They informed me we were cut of Cooks
Routfabout 10 Leagues & within 2 leagues of Santa Cruex.
They bade me good by & down I lay & enjoyed my novel
until& the wagons came up inthe evening & Encemped,
distance 6 mi.

: 27 Considerable rain during the night & the morning

cool & lowering, Cept.Phillips & I started in advance
of the wegone & in a Walk of 5 miles entered Santa Cruex
in a rich fine Valley. they Senta Cruseans have some 5
or 600 acres enclesed with a very poor brush fence, but
the portion near the town has e very fine row of large
cold cotton wood trees planted closely round & interwoven
with brush, it gives the Velley a beautiful cultivated
look & as the town lies embosomed in its rugged Hills
with ite belt of Stately Trees & well cultivated fields
all intersected by a good streem the Rio Santa Cruex it
can vie with any vlace IT have yet seen in Mexico the
Church i's quite @ large old Gothick Building but going to
decay it disoleys good taste in its architecture. the
rest of the town can only boast of Houses one story high
with the exception of the barrack which contain about 50
soldiers rether Suspicious Seedy looking fellows but
their muskets were bright but from their antiquated
Appearance I should think rather useless in the days of
revolvers ete the ones I examined bears the date of 1617
Tower so of course they are old English pieces, the
soldiers were receiving their allowance of corn meal. the
only rations they get. it appeared to have been carried
a long distence & was packed in skins the same as cur
Ceroons of Indigo = the town at a distance presented the
appearance of small patches of wratnearly ripe as each
house top was covered with a good crop of grass now get-
ting rather yeljow, put still it was better than on the
surrounding Comons as the goats, Sheep & Pigs could not
conveniently reach it = the Inhabitants were better dressed
than eny other town through which we had passed, the

===== PAGE 071 =====
19849 Unbrella - Priest Wax Figurea - Page 71
/ Holy Procession

Sept. 27 men wore their long open pentaloons some of them velvet
& Slashed in 2 gaudy & gay style & probably a piece of
ribbon or Gauze frilled round their SomnrAro & the ever.
lasting Blanket of verious gay colors Jauntily thrown
around the shoulders the fair Senoras wexe equally
tasteful in their adornment, White on celTored skirts of
some gay pattern of good calico, neat. shoes of Satin or
silk & the Slete & black Rebosa neetsly arranged around
the head & the not te be forgotten Cigaro in their sweet
lings - all made us aware that we were in Mexico, they
carry on come little Trade & manufactories I visited a
gaddlers shop, a Blacksmiths, three or four shoemakere
all making fine light shoes for Ladies & two or three
other establishments - we camped ahovt % mile below
town & obtained permission to Trade our wagons were
soon surrounded by the population of the place & @ brisk
business was carried on in Love, Handkerchiefs, needles,
Thread, pins, ete. etc the town ao€4 not afford any faci-
lities for such shopping, not one being in the city -
T hed an umbrella which appeared one of the most remark-
able & comolex inventions of the age, its uses were so
various, 9 walking cane, 9 shede from col & a protection

. ageinst rain, the thing wee almost incomprehensible.

the first young Senoretta which I initiated into the
mysteries of raising it aloft, ran off to her companions
vho stood perfectly bewildered to see her carrying such
a large covering with so much ease, but when she showed
them the easy method of reducing it, their laughter &
Merriment knew no bounds, one woulé raise it & four or
five crowd round her & such strutting & wriggling, Jump-
ing & skipping never were witnessed, Never did old
turkey Gebbler or Gay Peacock displey his gaudy tail
with helf the pride that the carrer of this cotton
umbrells exhibited to the astonished Santa Cruzeans. In
the evening passing the chapel I was attracted by the
lights & entered, there stood the priest whe very
politely exhibited ell the paintings & wax works the :
latter were the best I had ever seen Jesus with the crown
of thorns exhibited the most intense suffering with the
most wonderful meekness & forbeerance. the agony inflicted
by the thorns appeared beyond endurance, the blood was
oozing out of every wound & a severe cut on the cheek
gave @ gastly and almost death like appearance to the
whole figure. the others were equally effective Jesus
on the cross, the apostles, & various Sainte in all about
30 or 40 figures, all as large as life, one fine oil
painting cf the Virgin & Son pleased me much, a number
of young girls collected round the door & I departed, in
a few minutes 4 procession igsued from the door two of the
Girls carrying the sbove painting & on each side of them
‘two more young Girls carried each a lighted candle, the
Priest welked immediately behind the painting and the
procession closed up with some 40 or 59 more of different
ages down to 8 or 10 years of age. they sang a solemn channt

===== PAGE 072 =====
1849 Dencing Harlequin - Graves - Page 72
Gerrata - Occupations

Sept. 27 to the Holy Virgin & halted at the Street Corners sc that
all the vious of the town had 4 fair chence expiating
their little peccadillos TI followed them round &
entered the church where they continued chatnting &
nraying for at least half an hour my companion & self
were the only Males present, whether it is that the men
have no sins to attone for or that the women wish to
leave none unblotted out I cannot pretend to say, but
they were the only Devotees, I left the Church previcus
to the termination of the ceremonies & entered a House
where I amused the inmates highly by exhibiting my
wonderful umbrella & a little dutch dancing Harlequin
the latter pvt them into the most uncontrollable bursts
of leughter and such excess cf mirth never was witnessed
when the little man wovld through up both feet & hands,
arms & legs, the fun really "grew fast & furious" but
if by any chance one of his little striped legs with its
yellow foot got stuck behind his head then there was ne
holding them, they clutched each other rolled over on
the floor & got into perfect Hy¥stericks of Laughter. I
was going te quit putting him through his anticks in pure
merey to them, but just as I was on the point of ceasing,
the Church Bell Reng cut a neal & in a moment every
Senoras& was on her marrow bones & with grave face telling

/ “over her beads - it only continued 4 moment & all were
once more anxious to witness Punch's anticks, it was
time to go & so we bade them Adois, & returned to camp,
as T hed the first guard untill 11 oclock, a number of
greves are on the street opposite the Church Door but
level with the rest of the Street a small frame is
oleced around them the name of the deceased is cut on
At, ege, date etc. it is about 2 inches wide & 12 inches
thick, it te also placed level with the surrounding
street and soon rots awey. I could trace none of earlier
date than 1829, as they have eo few wheeled vehicles
the grace is pretty much the same in town as on the
surrounding commcns, all their wood for fuel is carried
on Boroas (Jack asses), a Carrata an unsightly Kind cf
ox cart with large solid wooden wheels constitute their
pleasure & Business conveyance, with oxen yoked by the
Horns, the whole concern is a burlesque on locomotion,
the females eppear to de little so far as my opport=

unity of Judging went, it consists of visiting religious
processions, smoeking the cigare ete their domestic
arrangements are few & not very difficult of verforming,
at Sente Cruex a fine row of Peach,Pomegranet & Cotton
Wood trees skirted the streem & afforded the senoras e@
grateful shade for washing, bathing, ete. they have no
floors to serub or windows to wash & the adornment of the
person of their children occupies but little time or
attention, Nature is a Kind Mother & careful nurse & to
her guardianship they are in a great measure left. in
their own persone they ere neat & but little cloatifs are

===== PAGE 073 =====
1849 Dreas ~» Prices of Provisions - Valley Page 73
of the Rio Santo Cruex = a Grave
Sept, 27 worn, a chemise & skirt, with the Rebosa to envelope the

Head & breast, the neat shoes generally worn without
stockings form pretty much the entire Dress, to this
of course there are great exceptions, but the above is

: the most general costume, I never saw a Bonnet or
corsets worn, 5 miles.

28 this morning we were early surrounded by the
different venders of Fruit vegetables ete small Apples
& peeches one cent each Pomepranats two cents Tomatoes
(@ poor smell article) two for a cent Chickens 25¢ each
Bees 1 cent each ete we made an early start & drove
down the Valley of the Rio Santa Cruex it is a gocd
rich seil & has been cultivated for 12 or 14 miles below
the town but all is now in ruin. Ranchieras are stand.
ing every few hundred yards but are now #11 Roofeless
& complete desolation rfins over the whole valley, old
Peach & Pomegrantte:are still flourishing round the
ruins with broken boughs & fruitless branches every-
thing shows that at one time this valley supoorted 4
large population all of which are either Killed by the
Apaches or they have removed to @ olace of greater
security. it is not more than about one month since
the Apaches made a descent on the Town & drove off
nearly 211 their stock. in fact they are in complete
terror & dread of their old Enemies making them leave
all this part of the State of Senora. it looked melen-
choly to see fine old Houses with large fruit Trees
planted around & every indication of 4 once flourishing
place to see nothing now but the hateful Buzzards & the
prowling wolf, all,all desolation - distance about 15 mi.

29 it now rains @ little every evening & at night very
heavy dews, co that I think our Tents will not last long
as we start in the morning previous to drying them. our
Road for the last two days has been down a very fine
Valley in fact the most extensive we have yet travelled
through. for Milee in some places it is as smooth as if
rolled & the Grama Grass & wild oats form a magnificent
melow the best natural médow I ever saw & the stream
ig fringed with large cotton wood, take it altogether
it is the fineet Valley through which our Road has lead,
to-day we passed the Grave of an Emigrant it was newly
made, but appeared to have been rooted up either by the
Wolves or Apaches, if was under a large old tree & the
name was cut on it (but now when I sit down to write
about it, it has entirely escaped my memory) 14 miles,

sO Sunday our Road to day was still down the Valley
but it became rough & uneaven & very poor grass fre-
quently for miles large beds of Sunflower some 15 to
18 feet high but not quite so large as the cultivated
would cover all the bottom. we passed a large deserted
smelting House, lots of dross lay around Silver, Conver,
Lead each had its advocates that it was the material used.

===== PAGE 074 =====
1849 Deserted Church - More Ruins of Towns Page 74
Churches etc ~ Visitars - Apaches

Sept. 30 my own impression was that Lead strongly adulterated
with Silver was the ore smelted. towards evening we
met ea small party of Mexicans 3 women & 4 men going
from Tadson on a visit to their friends at Santa Cruex.
one of the men had been in California & gave the most
wonderful accounts of the quantity of Gold to be found
in that prolific Region. they camped with us & we had
quite an amusing & pleasent Evening - it appears some-
what strange this visiting of Friends some 90 or 100
miles apart & travelling through an uninhabited country.
they carry an extra blanket on their saddle & soon make
their Bivouac for the night. they Just spread it out
on the grass & tumble down, sleep sound & are off at
day break, 18 miles.

Oct, 1 cool night & hot sun during the day. a few miles
after leaving camp I was astonished to hear the Clear
loud Ring of two bells which chimed harmoniously on the
pure morning air and on looking across the Valley &
stream IT espied a handsome white church, on passing
over I found as usual all desolation, some of the young
men of the Train had been in advance & were ringing the
Bells in something of an unusual manner. some of the
adventurous of the boys had fastened the long lash of
their Ox whip to the clapper & were pealing out a merry
chime, the Church & all the surrounding Buildings were
in a fine State of preservation, the Paintings Guild-
ings, Cement Floor, Walls & every thing was in perfect .
order with the exception of the names most shamelessly
scratched on the Walls by some of the Gold seekers
the whole place had a monastic appearance rows of
cells confessional stalls etc. the Garden was well
filled with full Grown Fruit Trees & they had been
heavily laden with Peaches Pomegranetes Quinces etc
but very few were left for us, however we gleaned a
few Peaches, there was something Oriental in the
appearance of this secluded & deserted town. the white
domes of the church, the deep Green trees, the Peaked & .
Rocky mountains immediately in the rear all combined to
give it an asiatic effect in our eyes, the High Garden
Walls & beautiful Baths still in as perfect a state as
when left by the fair inmates of the convent led us to
believe that the Apaches gave them but short notice pre-
vious to departure. I crossed back & overtook the wagons
& in the course of two miles further entered another de-
serted town everything just as when the inhabitants left.
the Corn Mills, four of which I counted in this town all
perfect. Boxes, Chests, Baskets, Doors with the locks on
& the various small articles which constitute a Mexicans
household lay in promiscuous profusion around, two large
Bells which had fallen from the Church Belfry bore the
same date as the Bells in the town before visited 1809 -
so that I suppose both towns Bells etc were not of very
Ancient date ~ Some of our Pious looking boys filled the
Confessional Chair & others of more Heretical Phix pre-
tended to make confessions to them, which was most to be

===== PAGE 075 =====
1849 Dress - Searcity of Water Page 75
Stupendous Cactus = Pemoas
Oct. 1 relied on for sincerity the forgiveness or confession
I pretend not to say, 12 miles,

2 Remained in Camp all day, although the Grass was
poor our oxen were now so reduced that Rest became
absolutely necessary. some few Mexicans & two Apaches
visited us, I could not well understand the reason why
those two Apaches remained unharmed amongst the Mexicans,
probably they had been taken young as they spoke the
Spanish Mexicano quite fluently, they were rather a
good specimen of the American Savage, their dress by
no means incommoded them, each of them wore only an
old shirt either the gift of some previous Train or @&
cast away. we contrived to raise a pair of inexpres-~
sibles for each of the Gentlemen & they appeared much
pleased with their new fit dut - at night our camp
presented quite a variety Mexicans, Apaches, & our own
beautiful unshaven faces all round the Blazing fires.

I hardly wish to say any more about Cactus but
one stood near my tent upwards of 12 feet high & Eighteen
inches in diameter, it presented the appearance of a
beautiful fluted column surrounded with large barbed ther-
sis, a cluster of seed pods on top each as large as a
hens Beg -

3 long of starting this morning as some of the cattle
had strayed & were late in recovering them during the
forenoon passed some 50 or 60 deserted Indian Wigwams.

. at our noon halt the mail carrier from Teuson to Santa
Cruex came up. he was a rather favorable specimen of
Mexican Peons & in a little wallet he had about 12
Letters, I examined them they appeared mostly directed
to military men he says his mule was stolen from him
when asleep by some of the Diablo Apaches. our firing
round our camp at night scared him almost to death & he
fled off to the mountains, at Evening we crossed the
Creek which was now almost dry & the country around
assuming a parched up appearance, we camped without
water & on the poorest Kind of Grass, 12 miles,

4 an Early start, in hopes to find water & Grass, our
Road lay over a complete desert with the exception of Mez~
quite Trees & cactus one of the cactus I measured it
was thirty five (35 5/12) feet five inches high & twelve
feet four Inches (12 4/12) in circumference it had 12
large arms & altogether so far exceeded any thing I could
have immagined that I suppose any who reads this will
doubt my word & I believe there are hundreds more much
larger, its stem was like a large Cotton Wood Tree beauti-
fully fluted & painted green, they prickles giving it the
appearance elaborate fancy work on the Edge of the flutes.
29 of which encompassed the tree. I could liken it to
nothing but some stupendeous deity of the Hindéés, I think
that three of our best Te@ms could not have haWled it, that
is 16 yoke of oxen would have been unable to remove it any
distance ~- at noon two Apache women passed us, it is said
"Beauty unadorned Adorned the most" those had neither the
adornment of Beauty or Dress, they were old & consequently

===== PAGE 076 =====
1849 San Gabriel ~ War Dance - Prisoners - Page 76
of the Pimdes

Oct, 4 ugly, with only a Blanket around their loins, at Evening we
camped near the Indian Villege of San Gabrie] on a stream
of good water, immediately after supper some 8 or 10 of us
determined to pay a visit to these Pimd Indiens as we had
heard some wonderful accounts of their general Civilization
& an advance in the various arts etc that refine mankind &
memoves pin from the Savage. as we advanced we heard a con-
tinued mming monotanous sound and soon ascertained that a
great war dance was at that moment in the act of celebration.
a Successful war party having just returned from the moun-
tains where they had been in pursuit of the Apaches & brought
in two Scalps & two prisoners, the night was clear & bright
& the moon almost at the full not a cloud obscured the
Horizon & every thing was in soft repose but the wild
passions of those children of Nature, around a pole on which
were suspended the bloody scalps were about one hundred &
fifty men women & even children all in the full tide of
successful dancing they were, wild & furious & for a length
of time kept at a very respectdble distance, however, my
curiosity got the better of my fears & I approached close
to the circle, they were as closely jan@a together as it
was possible for them to stand & holding each others hands
they kept continually dancing round & round some time
the motion was reversed I suppose to put out the twist
or Snarl. one tall Chief in the center appeared to act as
Tide man & as his Motions were slackened or quickened so
was the Circle accelerated or retarded their costumes
were as verious as their ages, sexes & Sizes, Some were
exceedingly simple & I suppose adapted to the climate but
would by no means answer for a more northern Latitude, One
tall good figure of a Girl appeared to attract attention
her dress was certainly not profuse but it was neat, taste-
ful leggins well covered with beads & small Bells consti-
tuted her ne&ther garments & her head adorned with an im-
mense plume of Eagles Feather was her whole dress, she had
a few devices painted on her Breast, She had been taken
prisoner by the Apaches some time previous & was now only
recovered — the two prisoners were only youths but appeared

: by no means dishartened & if they had not been pointed out to

me as the prisoners it is doubtful if I would have recognized
them as such, they were entirely naked & had their heads
closely shaved as they were going to be adopted into the
tribe, the dancing still continued with great fury and I had
been witnessing it upwards of two hours when I found a
decided difference in the time & tone of their monotonous
chant, it got into a regular wail & soon all the women were
in tears the Hair of the prisoners was produced tied to a
long pole when all the warriors rushed out with great fury
in their looks & each armed with a knife Tomahawk etc. made
a dash at the devoted Hair & I discovered that the Warrior
who made the Sharpest cut & obtained the most Hair got
decidely the greatest applause, they looked like a set of
Deamons let loose & I would certainly have pitied any un-
fortunate Apache who might have fallen into their hands at

===== PAGE 077 =====
1849 Prisoners Christianised ~ the Church Page 77
of San Gabriel

Oct. 4 this time. the next Great operation was to Christanise ,
the two Apache prisoners which was done in quite a summery
manner in fact I defy even Brother Moffet to make pro-
syliteiwith greater rapidity or of more seeming sincerity -
@ splendid wax figure of the Virgin Mary was brought forth
from the Church & placed in the Center of the dancers the
prisoners were then ordered to Kneel in front of her &
after performing some rather strange ceremonies were with-
out doubt pronounced true members of the true church. an

' old lady who appeared to take a deep interest in the welfare
of the youths now leaped into the dancing ring and performed
various extraordinary Gymnastic Gambols it is true her
dress by no means impeaded her action as it consisted only
in a small belt around her loins & a rather cumberous Head
dress of Feathers, She danced with such vigor that the
presperation fairly rolled down her fat sides & streamed
in rivulets over her well rounded legs, I remained untill
near morning & could discover but little diminution in the
vigor of the Actors it continued in full force shouting,
singing & dancing. with the noise of what fire Arms could
be produced some of our company were armed & their services
were in high demand. I loaded & fired at the suspended
Scalps, or rather above them so that the sparks might fall
on the bloody Hair it elicited shouts of Joy & applause
& I was surrounded by numerous tawny warriors & dingy
squaws & no doubt but if an expedition had been on foot
for the complete extirpation of the Apache Nation I would
have been proffered some distinguished situation but I had
to tear myself away from those interesting savages least
a change might come oter the Spirit of their dance & they
might tear me. about 16 miles
5 we started eerly & drove down to this Strangest of all

the congregations of Mankind on the American Continent,
as near as I could Guess or ascertain from observation,
there are about one hundred & Ninety Indian Huts of the
most primitive construction a few Bushes laid together &
thatched with a little coarse grass. their height about
5 or 6 feet in the center. Circumference some 18 to #4
feet neither impervious to sun or rain. A stately & mag-
nificent Church with Spires, Domes & Minerets, Gothick
Gateways. Marbled Floors. Niches containing sculpture
of the old masters, carving, Guilding, Stucco, Paintings
& Bronze Statues all in a profusion which is perfectly
pewildering & Astonishing. Surrounded by noble courts &
a Garden of at least Twenty Acres enclosed by a fine brick
wall caped with cut stone. such an incongrous assemblage
I think can not be equalled if even approached by any
other on Earth, probibly there may be some in the Land
of the Bible, but I am sure no where else that could show
a greater contradistinction between the Inhabitants &
the Church - this Chaste & Elegant Edefice was erected by
old Spain about 80 or 90 years ago when she was in all her
Pride & Glory. her scepter has fallen her people are
debased & her Alters are Desecrated. her Wealth & power

===== PAGE 078 =====
1849 Paintings - Teuson ~ Military Page 78

Oct. 5 are gone & a few poor Ignorant India with a few Mexicans
almost as degraded & Equally as Superstitious are now
the only inhabitants of what must have at one time been
a populous & wealthy city. the Church with its surround-
ing buildings & Garden Wall (& the wall has been thrown
down or tumbled in many places) are nearly all that
remains. But their religious superstitions have had
one good effect the Church, paintings, Statuary Sculp-
ture, Guildings etc remain in an almost perfect state of :
preservation, the flowing purple silk velvet Robes of our
Savior with its deep Golden Border are almost free from
stain or dust, the pure white dress of the holy Virgin
is like spotless snow, how those people contrive to
excell our best Manglers is to me a MYstery. I counted
near three hundred figures nearly all as large as life,
in sculpture, stucco, Bronze, Marble etc, consisting of
Jesus, Angels, Apostles, Scripture personages etc, the
Paintings I did not pretend to enumerate, they were
almost countless, the Domes, Ceilings & all were covered
with them, the Guilding ,Marbaling etc,completely covered
all the spaces between the Paintings & sculpture, the
church is said to have cost about one Million of Dollars,
when the labor of the Indians is taken into consideration
at the low estimate in which it was valued we form some
faint value of this charming & Gorgeous Church - it was
shown to us by a respect&ble looking Pueblo Indian, who
earried a large bunch of Keys, We gave him a small pit-
tance for his Kindness which he deposited in a strong Box.
I think all the donations which he will receive from
travellers will be long of filling the huge rescepticle,
As strangers visits to this Terra Incognits& will be like
Angels - few & far between, Some of our company traded
for a few of their cattle, they are a beautiful formed
animal & the prices moderate about half the price such
would have commanded in the States - we drove to within
about two miles of Té@son. 9 miles,

6 Visited the Town & found that a description of Santa
Cruez will almost answer for T&fson Flat Roofed Houses,
no particular part of the compass atrickly adhe&sred to in

_ the direction of the Streets, an adobe Church - three
Bells attached to it, a few ununiformed Soldads, a Soli-
tary Cannon mounted on wheels much troubled with the
Riumatism as they were all plastered round with Raw hide &
I think under no provocation whatever could be induced to
take up the line of march against Either the Encroaching
American or Prowling Apache, we expressed our desire to
purchase or trade for some of their cattle, Flour, Punkins,
Quinces ete and that we would remain in their Neighborhood
for two days. they informed us that their cattle should
remain in the corrél next day until all were supplied, we
traded off a worn down ox (Dick) & Gave four Dollars cash
for which we obtained a handsome young Bull. I purchased
another as a mate for him for which I paid 14% fourteen
Dollars, thus our team was made up to its original number.
(4:yoke) we had considerable difficulty with them but by

===== PAGE 079 =====
1849 , Trading of Oxen - Funeral Ceremonies <- Page 79
Coéking

Oct. 6 care soon broke them to Harness altho their Ana@usian
Origén was fully sustained in their bold & vigorous
attempts to retain their Liberty, they were the most
beautiful & perfectly formed animals I ever saw, the
Train gob a complete supply of those spirited creatures.
some of the young Cows were as clean in the limbs as a
deer & perfectly gentle in all their movements, They
would have made a handsome addition to a United States
farm yard, I visited the paintings ete. Kept in a Room
adjoining the Church as I was anxious to avail myself
of all facilities in forming a correct judgment of the
Mexicans - in their Religion, Manners, customs, Paint-
ings, etc, aman entered & selecting a small Bier,
turned towards me & appeared pleased with the examina-
tion whether it was my Patriarckxal appearance (as I
had been for 6 months innocent of the inroads of a
Razor) or the Superior quality of my Gun both having
been duly & carefully examined I pretend not to say,
probably both were prepossessing, but he invited me in
the Kindest manner to accompany him, we soon entered
his House where a number of fexmales were assembled
around. Something which I at first supposed was a
highly decorated Wax Doll but on a closer inspection
discovered it to be a deceased Child of 4 or 5 years
old, it was gaudily ornamented with Ribbons & Painted
paper cut in various handsome devices, a small Cross
placed on its breast & in each hand a flower, I sat
down & with great patience waited to see what part of
the ceremony I was to perform, the Priest now entered &
a number of Candles being lighted the order of Procession
wes formed.’ the fire Arms took the lead. that is the
old fellow who had been for the Bier & self. he armed
with an old Musket & I with my Double Barreld & each
flanked by &@ Boy who carried powder, next the Music
a Fiddle & a Guitar, next the Body & four Candle bearers
(it was now dark) then the Priest & last all the mourners,
chaknters, singers etc. all women, the Priest the Music
& the Military being all the men present. in this order
we approached the church but halted at all the street
corners to give the Inhabitants a little Music, singing
& firing all of which was performed with great decorum,
the Body was laid down on the Altér & the fiddle & Guitar
struck up a merry Waltz. the Priest & women sung & at
the close of each plece we fired off our Guns. then
would succeed a son chaunt & at every pause bang went
our Guns, again in this manner which constituted quite
a variety in the Funeral Ceremonies, we remained some
hours, when thinking it full time to return to Camp I
bade my companion in Arms adieu but certainly not with-
out the most pressing solicitations to remain untild
all was completed,

? Sunday to day we remained in Camp making preparations
to resume our Journey Tomorrow, & held quite a Service
being surrounded all the time with groups of men, Women,
& Children, Our Train here divided only 11 wagons now
rem@ining in the Company to which I belonged the reason

===== PAGE 080 =====
1849 Barren Road from Tearfgon to the Page 80
Pima Village - Severe times

Oct, 7? was that serious accounts of the Scarcity of Grass & Water
on the rest of our journey let’ us to this conclusion -
I visited the town & witnessed some of their culinary
operations a fine fat girl sat at a small fire (out
side the Door) & with her platter of dough at her side
would take off small pieces about the size of an Egg
flatten it between her hands & then throw it back &
forward from hand to hand with great rapidity, where
she soon reduced it to a thin round cake as large as a
good dinner plate and as thin as a wafer. it was then
flung on a hot earthen pan of circular & concave shape
and iy a few seconds was cooked, it certainly required
quite*quantity to stay the stomach of an hungry man,
put they were produced with great expedition.

8 this morning we made our preparations for Starting
& by 10 o clock had left the good town of TeufSon behind,
our road was over @ barren sandy plain with some prickly
shrubs & mezquite bushes & the tall spires of the cactus
every where visible far over topping every thing else
towards noon we found a little stagnant water. we then

: drove on to dark & cooked supper but no water & little
or no grass, we were compelled to yoke up & drive until}
near morning. I drove all day on account of our wild
Bulls as the man who was in general our driver was not
by nature possessed of the most placid disposition & I
discovered that in Physical force we were by no means a
match*for the descendants of the And@lusians - so by a
little gentle persuasion we coaxed some little services
out of them - day burning hot - distance 14 m,

9 water still scarce or in fact none the day burning
hot & the plaine as yesterday, dry sandy, tall cactus,
Mezquite Bushes etc. mountains on all sides rocky, naked
& barren, how we wished for a drink of cool water but
alas none to be found in the Train, our Oxen exhausted
but still we had to proceed & at noon came to some slimy
green ponds full of all sorts of active little gentlemen,
but we drank heartily & so did our oxen, we strained the
water through our teeth as well as we could but no doubt
some small fry who had not arrived at mofths of discra-
tion escaped down our throat to meet speedy disolution -
the water had a salty saleratus taste but it was better
than none, travelled a good part of the night & slept
a little before morning, 30 miles,

10 this day would only be a repetition of our suffer-
ings & as we were continually travelling or working I had
no time to even write my few memorandums as I had always
done, everything which I have previously written was put
down on the day & place of the ocourwhes we fagged
through about 18 miles,

il the weather was as it had been dry & scorching
all presenting @ burnt appearance & with a little pond
water we contrived to toil on & make 15 miles,

12 after a drive of about 3 miles we came to the Gila
River, that long looked for & anxiously expected place of
Relief but it was a sandy barren soil covered with mezquite

===== PAGE 081 =====
1849 Rio Hila or Gila - Business trade Page 81
ete ~ Of the ari copes Indians
Oct. 12 bushes with a few good cotton wood trees immediately on
its bank. we unyoked & let our pairsty cattle have a
hearty drink of its muddy turbul&nt waters, I took @
refreshing bath & we remained here some 5 or 4 hours
surrounded by some fine looking Indians of the Maricopa
tribe in fact the best specimens of the Human Race
divine I ever saw either White,Black or Copper - we moved
down in the evening 5 miles nearer their village. 8 miles
135 as we intended remaining at the Pimd Village some
time to trade off our exhausted stock & if possible to
provide some provisions for the Desert. I started off in
advance of the wagons which were to follow down & encamp
in front of the Chiefs residence, my path led through
tangled Mezquite & low thorny shrubs untill suddenly I
came to an opening containing 50 or 60 low huts, surrounded
by men,women.Dogs etc, their Huts are low not more than
five feet high & nearly circular rather oblong about twenty
feet in diameter & flat on top made of willows & straw. in
front they have generally a square flat shed about 6 feet
high 12 feet square their door or entrance is 30 inches :
high & 22 inches wide so of course they have to crawl in
on their hands & Knees but they are very expert at it -
they pop in & out like Rats in their holes, I tried the
. experiment but found it a tedigus and difficult operation
& the examination hardly repait me for the trouble, the
inside consisted of a straw mat & a few earthen ware
utensils with gourd etc the women were either busy
examining each others heads, where they appeared to be
reaping an abundant harvest or pounding corn, mezquite
Beans, or grinding wheat at all of which occupations they
appeared busy munching. an unfortunate louse met the same
fate as a stray grain of wheat or a strolling Bean their
dress was very primative, something wrapped around the loins
: & a few beads or trinkets around the neck was the only
Dress of the adults the younger portion were some of them
entirely incommoded with even that much, the men were
equally plain in their appes* i however, some of the
Dandys sported a vest or prob€bly a shirt, but the nether
extremity was entirely "Au Natural" we remained in front of
his Highnesses Residence Don Antonio De Luna who with his
Lady senora & his accomplished Daughter Donna Cynthia
Sylvia Luna paid us a distinguished visit, his highness
was dressed in a Brogory shirt,Blue pants & an old mili-
tary frock coat prob&bly presented by M&ss xébney or Cooke
he was without exception a noble looking man, his squaw
was "Fat dark " Forty" & Cynthia the lovely Cynthia with
only her loins begirt by an envious striped comforter. we
received them as became their high standing by presenting
valuable presents, to his highness we presented a red cap.
to the senorak a piece of tobacco & to the gentle Sylvia
a few choice beads & Gilt buttons. all appeared highly
pleased & in return we received a few ears of roasted Corn
& what I concluded was a broiled rat & of which fact I was
afterwards convinced by discovering that such game were
considered one of the greatest delicacies & presented

===== PAGE 082 =====
1849 Continued Trade with the Coco Maricopas =~ Page 82
their manufacters ~ customs

Oct. 13 to favored visitors as we would a woodcock Rope & all.
the trade continued brisk during the afternoon receiving
in exchange for our Barter corn, fodder for our Oxen at
the rate of 10 cents per Bundle. our articles were
verious Beads, Buttons, red Flannel, Hickory shirts,
Handkerchiefs etc. the Yankee Genius of sone of our
Company soon discovered that a red shirt to into _longi-
tudinal stripes would in this way pay the enterpriging
proprietors for laying it out in lots & a retail trade
was continued with much briskness untill every Pimo,Mari-
copo, squaw & papoose were decorated st both Bow & Stern,
Red streamers fluttering briskly in the breeée. we could
scarcely trade for Horses or oxen both of which were
scarce especially the former ~ their Horses were valued
at about 80§,oxen 20$ in fact only one or two Horses
were obtained & a few oxen exchanged by us giving boot
between our worn out oxen & their fresh ones,

14 Sunday It would be difficult for me to state their
numbers with even an approach at exactness, I should
suppose,the number twenty thousand, their settlement
continues upwards of Twenty Miles & how wide I am unable
to say, the country where they live is a complete
desert, but by Irrigation they produce good crops of
corn, wheat, Beans & Peas twice a year, they also raise
a superior article of Cotton from which they manufacture
a square piece of cloth about 44 feet long by 4 feet
wide superior to our best Osenburgh for which they ask
the moderate price of Ten Dollars of course none but
the Nobility and Gentry possess such expensive habili-
ments, a Head Dress of twisted cotton Rope some times
White & often Red is generally worn. both sexes wear
their Hair long. the mens bound up & the females float-
ing in flowing luxuriance round the Head & Shoulders -

I visited the fashionable part of the town & was con-
siderably astonished at the magnificence of the head
dresses of both sexes of the fashionable youths the
young Beaus had the hair twisted rope like all around
the Head & a Coat of mud dried as hard as a brick
plastered all over. it exceeded the old powdered cava-
liers of Queen Annes time immesurably & I am certain
that if some of the old Flemish painters had seen the
females they would hide their own diminished Heads, for
here was tier upon tier formed into a lofty pyramid &
the hair drawn from all parts of their Heads to meet at
the top that I pitied the poor Belts who could with the
greatest difficulty & strongest muscular exertion of the
Eye lashes bring them together to cover the Orb of
Beauty & expression,

I am sorry I cannot add my share of praise to their
virtues so far as honesty goes for we lost both our axes
& I individually a shirt & some other things in fact
every wagon was pilfered of something less or more. some
lost valuable coats etc, the reason was that from Emory's
description he represented them as perfectly Honest & con-
sequently we took less care than we otherwise would have
done. it is evident that their intercourse with the white man
has by no means improved their virtues & I am sorry to say that

===== PAGE 083 =====
1849 pam@s Continued — Dreary Times Page 83
Oct. 14 such is generally the pyesult of the acquaintance-ship
formed of such incongrous materials.

: in general they are fat & healthy looking, well
formed & straight & features pleasing & manly. their
complection,very dark, Ardent Liquors are unknown as is
coffee,Tea & spices, their food is the "Fruits there
drink the Cyrystal Well® or at least the flowing Gila.
from the Bark of the Mezquite they manufacture good Ropes,
also from Hair, they are fearless & bold Horsemen, both
sexes ride well & always mount & dismount at what we call
the off side, a monetonous dance was continued each
night but I witnessed no musical Instrument, their dance
resembled that described at San Gabriel but not so fierce
or ardent. they display much Kindness to each other
the youths generally sauntering along hand in hand, I
never witnessed a mother correcting a child they always
tried to sooth it into good humor such traits as I
witnessed among those Pimds & Maricopas might be copied
by some nations considering themselves enlightened with
good results - their Language is a low gutteral scarcely

: ever rising above a whisper. gesture assists them con-
siderably in their desire to communicate Ideas, I never
seen such an House as a place of Worship. although nearly
all have Crosses suspended from their necks. at one time
they were undoubtedly professing Catholicks but as the
grendure & power of old Spain decreased so did those
Indians professions of the true Church. their mode of
treating diseases appeared rather noval to me, I seen a
sick woman with a child about 4 month old who looked
equally 111 with the mother, An old medicine Man entered
with his squaw. he approached the sick woman who was
lying on her back & pulling her in that position into the
glaring hot sun commenced pressing on her Breast some—
thing like the plan of Kneading dough in a trough & every
respiration the pressure was augmented the woman bore it
with exemplary patience but I could see from the contor-
tions on her countenance that she suffered awfully. the
child was undergoing a similar Kneading under the old
Sybyls hands but its power of forbearance was not equal
to She Mothers for every pressure it squalled as loud as
ite little diseased lungs would allow, I remained at
least one quarter of an hour in hopes to see the treatment
either changed or cease but no cessation of hostilities,
the old savage was determined to drive out the Devil from
both mother & child & those the old naked Esculapious sat
in the dust pressing the poor mothers Chest when I took
my departure from the sickping scene, I was present at
some other scenes of suffering where the treatment was
equally as abhorant to comon sence,

15 this morning I bade Adois to his Highness & alli the
royal Family. I was quite a favorite as I had played onthe
flute to him & also exhibited the never to be forgotten &
always astonishing Umbrella & dancing Doll both of which
wonders he was anxious to be in possession of & indeed I
cannot say to what lengths his generosity or desire would
have led him but I shook.my head & negativated all proposi-

===== PAGE 084 =====
1849 Night Travelling ete - Driving Page 84
at Night
Oct. 15 tions to part with them — the Huts still continued on
for the next 10 miles the country presenting the same
Barren dry sandy appearance as from Teuson. the ground
wag covered with an incifstation of salt & a drearger
looking country could not be found, hardly excepting
the Great Deasert of Sahara, at evening we found some
Brakish water in ponds & a very scanty supply of Grass,
day scorching hot not the smallest cloud & not a breath
of air, Nights very cold 15 miles,

16 remained in camp untill 6 o'clock p.m. the day
was as usual clear & burning hot - our train had now
dwindled down Ben? wagons Mess. Rankins, Armstrong,
Phillips, Wink: & self, as grass was now so scant we
thus broke up into small parties, hoping thereby to
escape the suffering which a larger train might endure,

: we had now a distance of 45 miles without Water, grass
or wood & we detained thus long to rest our cattle &
make prep#rations for it. we were surrounded by Indians
all day & it was amusing to see them scrambling for
Boxes, Barrels & many a cherished article which we had
carried upwards of 2000 miles but were now forced to
abandon. even the most buoyant of us now became rather
down hearted from the scarcity of Grass & fears were
entertained that we would be unable to proceed, dead
oxen,mules & horses were strewed all along the Road, my
own team showed many symptoms of disability to proceed,
but I was very Careful of them & drove a good part of the
time often & often now were my feet in Blisters from
the hot Burning sand but I believe I kept my spirits up
as well as the youngest. I thought of Home & its endear-
ments once more & determined to succeed or at least to
persevere to the last I drove the wagon until& about
11 o'clock at night where we camped without either wood
water or Grass, on a dry sandy plains with a few prickly
shrubs the names of which I am unacquainted with, about
10 o'clock I drove through a Grove of those tall Cactus
so often mentioned tall & straight from 15 to 40 feet
high & from two to 12 feet in circumference, their
straight Stems looking like the stupendious columns of

. Some Ancient Buildings of which they were the only remains,
There was just sufficient light to discern them between
me & the sky & those tall fluted Green Pillars in this
lonely & uninhabited Country far, far from home, brought
strange recollections. of by gone days, but the stern
reality was here before me & nothing but perseverance
could ever succeed, I threw down my little bedding close
to the wagon wheel looked up at the clear stars for some
time & soon fell fast asleep 10 miles.

17 awoke some time before day, looked up at my bright
canopy the stars & from their situation discovered it was
time to start, aroused our camp & yoked up our oxen &
off. the morning as usual bright & clear & a hot sun
soon darted down his burning rays on our tired & hungry

. train, we drove over such a country as already described

===== PAGE 085 =====
1849 No Grass or Water - Dying Oxen = Page 85
Melancholy times
Oct. 17 not one spear of grass nothing but those eternal prickly
shrubs. not a mouthful for the poor oxen nor one drop of
even tolerable water for ourselves thirst & hunger!!!
let no man who has a home even in middling circumstances
ever try this long tedious Route, never let him sigh for
a cot in some vast wilderness for here lonely uninhabited
wastes & for ever must remain such,meet the Bye turn it
\ in which direction you will. plains with prickly shrubs,
no Grass nothing even for a poor Ox to take hold of.
surrounded by high rugged mountains of naked stones, with
the exception of the Cactus etc, not a Bird not an animal
of any Kind with the exception of Lizards rattle snakes
ete & the croaking Raven & Loathsome Buzzard flying over-
head & at night an ocpssional serenade from the prowling
wolves
the patience of the ox & his durability are wonderful.
here we have oxen that have toiled on daily for upwards
of —~ 2000 miles & even now would be servicable had the
poor animals any thing to eat but literal starvation is
wearing them to the bones some of the poor fellows makes
my heart bleed, they stagger along to the last minute &
, then tumble down in the very yoke which is soon removed
from the dying slave. his master takes a parting look at
poor "Berry" & the probability is that before the trains
are 400 yards on the move in advance that one Eye or per-
haps both are torn out of his living head to fill the greedy
maw of the croaking Raven, the wolves soon finish the
feast thus begun & his bones bleach on those inhospitable
plainas, We nooned under some prickly shrubs but had
nothing for our oxen neither water or Grass we remained
until& near sunset & started once more through a gorge
between two mountains rising off the level plaine &
drove untill about 10 o'clock 30 miles,

18 we rested about 2 hours during which time I slept
soundly as the night was cool & clear. the stars were
bright overhead & we drove over the same Kind of light
soil which raised a perfect cloud of floating impalpable
Dust almost suffocating. As I was in advance I could not
see how my companions were getting along behind but when
I reached the Bank of the Rio Gila I feund we were one
Wagon short in our number. Dr. Winkins team having given
out, it was now breaking Day & we determined to wait for
him, he soon arrived leading two of his oxen the rest
were back with the waggxon being unable to move on, we
here expected to find grass but not one single blade of
that article was to be found Mezquite, tall weeds, &
prickly shrubs & the dust in the roads absolutely over
the shoe mouth, it was a gloomy sight for our poor cattle
& what still added to supposed dangers in advance was the
amount of articles strewn on the shore, every wagon which
had been here seemed terror stricken with the prospect

. eshead & had consequently lightened their load all that
was not absolutely necessary, Trunks, Boxes, Chains,
Screws, Bolts, Wagons etc were all strewn around, We
determined to teke the hint & throw away our Trunks & Boxes

===== PAGE 086 =====
1849 Suffocating Heat - Strange Bird Page 86

Oct. 18 at the next encampment - we drove down the River bottom
about 5 miles & unyoked our cattle amongst some small
Cotton Wood trees where they might Browse & during the
afternoon threw all our Boxes & trunks overboard which
lightened us up some hundred pounds, I was offered two
splendid Trunks & chests etc.Ox Chains for a tin cup -
put declined the advantageous trade. 8 m.

19 remained all day on the Bank of the Gila or within
a short distance of it, nothing but high weeds, Mezquite
trees & prickly shrubs. our poor cattle could scarcely
pick sufficient to support their weak frames from totter-
ing down, it is true our loads were light but without
sustenance how could we proceed, dreary was our prospect,
the sun beamed down hotter than any of us ever felt before
not a single cloud obscured it from rising to setting
every thing red hot. dust ankle deep & the only consola-
tion or relief I had was the shooting of a few Quails
which are here abundant but the Chappérals is so close
that it is impossible to come near them. JI here seen
that wonderful Bird described in the spirit of the times
some years ago, it has a Parrots legs & Feet, a Bitterns
head & neck & the body of a Virginia Clapper Rail, the
tail feathers resemble a magpie, it has a Gizzard & eats
‘soorpions etc, its body is not larger than a pigeon.

20 Started off as soon as we found our cattle & drove
all day in dust that when I was at the rear of the Wagon
I could not see the oxen which were hawling it. the dust
was absolutely blinding & suffocating & the day beaming
Hot. no man raised in a northern climate can form an Idea
of it. roasting, boiling or any other simile would be
faint to give the least notion of the double distilled
heat which here prevails at this season, but we tolled on
through this scorching soil & camped once more without
grass, here we had learned that the Apaches had stolen
from the various trains which had passed both oxen &
horses, I volunteered as one to remain out with the cattle
all night & the rest of this adventure shall be written to-
morrow ~ I have now hardly time to make my memorandums as
driving, Herding, Mending & attending to the little duties
of the Camp occupy all my spare time, 12 miles,

21 Sunday herded the cattle all night & every.thing
remained quiet with the exception of the wolves who would
occasionally set up a most dismal Howl right at our very
sides but "Nep" soon drove them off, an old Horse had been
picked up the day previous & by unanimous consent was
handed over to me. I felt quite proud of my ‘Rosinante™
& had anticipated many a fine ride on him but alas! in
the morning he was amongst the miss =pé. whether stolen
by some wandering warrior or taken french leave I could
not tell, during the night some wandering Indians "Coca
Maricopas" came into camp their skin resembled an im
proved Berkshire that had been indulging rather too
freely in Playing the Scotch Fiddle against a rough post,:
how they contrive to stand the pricks & thorns of those

===== PAGE 087 =====
1849 Murder -— Execution of the Murderer - Page 87
Articles thrown away

Oct. 21 plains & mountains I am unable to form the least Idea
of as every shrub is armed like a fretful porcupine. we
started at noon & scon came to two new Graves, the
murdered & the murderer sleep almost side by side in
this desert of sand. the particulars are recorded on
a board at the head of the Grave & nailed on a mezquite
tree, it appears a train arrived here on the 4 Sept
from Arkensas & two of the Ox drivers had frequently
quarreled on the way, on the morning of the 5th both
were herding the cattle & once more disputed when one
named Geo. W. Hickey was whipped by Elivah Davis &
hollowed enough but was no sooner rescued from Davis
than he Stabbed him in the Back so that he died ina
few minutes. a Jury was assembled from the different
trains (there were three here at the time) who found him
guilty & determined to execute him forthwith. however
his sent&nce was deferred untild next day (6 Sept 1849)
when twelve men were drawn from the Companies & six Guns
loafied with powder & Ball & 6 only with powder, his
grave was dug & he duly placed beside it. his execu-
tioners were placed at the grave of the murdered man,
the distance ac&ross the road or Wagon path about 40 feet
& the orders given to fire when he fell dead & the next
Flood in the Rio Gila will obliterate every mark from
the face of the earth of this murderer & his victim =- it
may appear strange in fact much Stranger than Fiction
that such deeds & such sudden retribution should follow
in those Wilds & solitudes but men carry their evil
passions with them wherever they go & here on this
proponges trip there is sufficient to derange the most
Equible temper. Burning, Scorching plains, no grass,
the cattle worn down & every thing dreary. the prospects
daily darkening. we now begin most seriously to doubt
the practicability of getting through wagons, stoves,
anvils, tables, chairs, Boxes, Trunks,clowthing of all
Kinds & in fact the road is litteraly strewed with all
the articles which Emigrants have considered useful &
necessary for the California Journey. we drove until
dark & Bncamped on a naked plain & close adjoining was
a@ pile of Black rocks completely covered with H¥rogli-
phicks some undoubtedly of great antiquity & some of
more recent date, no water or grass, 8 miles.

22 started by about 12 o clock & drove untilS the road
led into the Bed of the Gila when we stopped untilh morn-
ing & then continued our weary way through deep sand for
some miles & then ascended the table land where naked
Black Rocks with a few of the spire cactus was the only
relief, we worked our way on to the river where our weary
oxen were unyoked amongst a few small Bitter cottonwood,
14 m,

23 remained all day & cut our wagon bed & shortened it
about 4 feet some of the others followed our Example &
some others threw one wagon away & doubled teams. every
expedient was resorted to which held out the least pro-
spect of success to a final determination of this ardéous

===== PAGE 088 =====
1849 The “Carrata’, Sugcor State’- Sepération - Page 88
Cough Mixture for Oxen
Oct. 23 Journey. the Bitter Willows & small cotton wood afforded
put @ poor relief to our starved cattle.

24 moved down a few miles to the encampment of Mess,
Porter, Grandall, Miller etc. it was now thought expedi-
ent by my partner to pack through to California in company
with Mr. Gordon & Mess. Angello;intended to take a Knapsack
& foot it through in company with a few more pedestrians.
It therefore became necessary we should divide the team,

I got the wheel cattle (Bob & Bright) & the leaders (Tom
& Lion) & once more razed the wagon (the Succor State)
down to one pair of wheels & a bed of 4 feet long in which
- I packed my cloathfs & a little provision & so became sole
owner Driver & propriater of the "Carrata" Succor State.
my two leaders scarcely deserved the name of oxen, they
were mearly skin & bone & of course I could not depend on
them for more than a few days. without a better prospect
of Grass an article which I think 18 difficult to find on
the Rio Gila at this season. however I had no alternative
& determined to proceed as long as possible in this way &
if at last I was compelled to walk why of course I would
bravely face it. This occupied us until’ the evening of the

26 when the cavalcade once more started down the bed of
the Gila, it consisted of deep sand & with great diffi-
culty the cattle could move through it. As I had some
little settlement to make with some of my fellow travel-
lers who would not start until? next morning, I remained
& sent on my Carrata with Dr, Porter. our encampment was
in the bed of the river which at high water I should think
varies from 6 miles to 50 miles as the whole valley between
the mountains is evidently filled with water from the
appearance of drift wood on the Mezquite trees on which
it is piled up tes’ to 15 feet high. I should suppose it
is 60 miles wide in some places in high water & all over
this bottom the soil is a loose light pulverized substance
as easily set <Tloat as water maple ashes, the oxen
would sink Knee deep & raise a dust through which it was
impossible to discover any object a few yards off. I
often wished the poor oxen had some of the celebrated
cough mixtures & cough pills for such wheezing & blowing
& coughing has seldome been heard, if they only had
possessed the powers of expectoration it might have
helped to cast off some of the noxious inhalations, but
it was as much as the drivers could do to keep their
throats clear so as to enable them to "Gee ho & Wo Ha"
as the company I remained with could not gather in all
their cattle the next day, it was postponed of course
their starting & the plan of building a Boat out of the
left wagons was suggested & adopted by Mess, Rankin, Arm-
strong, & Phillips & on the

29 in the evening she was launched & about one ton
weight of various articles placed in her with six or
Elght days provisions, we seen them off with three cheers
& told them to wait at the crossing of the Rio Colorado
untill we should meet them with our wagons, as Soon as

===== PAGE 089 =====
1849 Boat Building - Lonely Journey Page 89
wa

Oct. 29 they were fairly under wath we yoked up & left this
curious encampment where the beach was strewn with ali
sorts of articles, Carpenters & Blacksmiths tools,
Kettles, Pots & Pans, Wearing apprarl etc. when we left
some 15 or 20 other wagons had arrived & all fell to &
followed our example, leaving even Guns, Pistols & Ammuni-
tion by the Ton. during the night we drove about 8 miles
through the deepest Kind of sand & dust. 8 miles.

30 started before day & drove some few miles & nooned
on sandy plain with a few mezquite Trees & it now clouded
up for the first time for a number of weeks & shortly a
few drops of rain which continued untilaA a very respect-
Able shower wet us to the skin, I suppose the first rain
since last March or April. we now began to think the
rainy season had began & scarcely Knew which would prove
the least disagreeable, the scorching flaming sun or an.
incessant deluge but we were agreeably dissagointed by its
clearing off & a pleasent cheereful Evening succeeding.
16 miles,

31 as our progress was necessarily slow & no prospect
of overtaking the 4 wagons to which I had attatched myself
I concluded that I would take an early start next morning
& reach them previous to passing the Gila. deep dust to
day & severe hawling camped on the Bank of the River
amongst some small willows, 12 miles.

Nov. this morning about 3 ere good by to Capt.
Phillins, I C, Armstrong, & ankin & with a willow
walking stick in my hand & the faithful Nep at my heels,
three water Biscuit in my pocket & a tin cup in my belt
also about one ounce of Ground Coffee I started over the
Wilds of Sonora without arms of any Kind (a small pocket
Knife being the exception) the moon was nearly at the
full & the morning bracing cool. When I ascended the
table land from the River a complete scene of desolation
spread out before me & all was silent as the grave not
the hum of an insect disturbed the solitude, for not even
a beetle could subsist on those dreary plains, it is true
that ocassionaly the distant Wail of the wolf could faintly
be heard, I thought of the Wish "Oh for a lodge in some
vast Wilderness" & concluded that here the Poet might be
gratefied but not for the continuation of that wish as
even the different tribes of Indians here meet to War &
hurl destruction on their already devoted race a con-~
firmation of which I was soon painfully impressed by Nep
bringing something forward in his mouth which on examina-
tion I discovered was a Human Scull not entirely divested
of the Sinews & flesh, from a cut on the top I concluded
that a tomahawk had been the fatal messenger which had
consigned this remnant of humanity to lonely a resting
place, the Incident was by no means calculated to
throw a cheereful feeling over my solitary Journey.
here I was an unarmed wanderer alone at night on the
great American Desert in the debatéble land of the Coco
Maricopas & the Yumahs but as fear was a feeling which
seldoms disturbed me I vroceeded on following the faint
track of the Wagons not Knowing whether I might succeed

===== PAGE 090 =====
1849 Ascending the Mountain ~ Alas! Poor Tom Page 90
Nov. l in overtaking them before reaching the crossings of the
Gila distant about 70 miles or not. in the distance was
a bold rugged mountain & the road led directly to its base
the distance might be about 10 miles & Just as morning
dawned I hed arrived at the foot after resting a few
minutes IT determined to ascend it & examine the surround-
ing Country. the task was a very Difficult one but in
about an hours hard elimbing over Rocks & Stones I gained
the top. the View was extensive but no wagons gratified
my sight. nothing but desert,;sandy plains, & rocky moun-
tains rising from those same plepes with the exception of
the Gila Winding through its tortuous beds of sand some
times spread out to a mile or two & some times more com-
pressed, its channel on those sandy ars not more than
six or 8 inches deep. not a shrub, blade of Grass or the
least particle of vegetation can be found on those moun-
tains with the exception of the spire cactus. I was
surprised to see a number of Rocks Covered with Indian
2 h¥roglyphicks. I supposed I had been the only Human being
who possessed the curiosity to ascend such piles of Rocks,
but it been traversed for thousands of years by those
. Aboriginals & why should not some of them have as much .
curiosity as a wandering stranger. I counted my steps both
ascending & descending & concluded the mountain upwards of
Nine hundred feet high. on my descent I viewed the moun-
tein in the morning sun it presented a reddish golden hue
: which gives all the mountains in this part of Sonora much
the appeerance of a Claude Loraine Landscape, but on a
close inspection all the lovliness fades away & nothing
remains but huge piles of reddish sand stone etc. my road
now led down through a sandy plaink with some mezquite
pushes & high weeds. I discovered an ox standing @ short
distance down in the high weeds, but such an occurance
rarely called any attention as worn down mules & oxen were
found scattered all along the road & I was passing on when
T seen an ox yoke with a piece of paper attatohed to it
which I had the curiosity to examine & found alas that it
was directed to myself. Mr. Porter said that the Colp ox
Tom (since I had started on this Journey I wae Known only
as the colonel) had given out & was here left to combat
for the short remainder of his life with the Wolves. I felt
a faint sickness at heart as I thought on the many a long
weary mile the gallant Tom had led our wagon. When our
Train emounted to 44 wagons Tom was considered the noblest
Meekest & best trained animal in that vast cavalcade, but
now alas to be entirely abandoned to the ravenous Wolves
in a strange country to have his beautifully rounded loins,
straight back, full & broad chest, delicate Head & full
Black Eye torn & mangled by those ever rapacious monsters,
the thought was too much & an irresistable tear trickled
down my cheek. No Tom said I this shall not be your fate
I will drive you on to where some more generous place will
yield you a little grass & water & where your strength
which you have expended in my service shall be renewed &
you be enabled to fight for your life & I impulsively turned
to where the feeble fellow stood trying to munch a mouthful

===== PAGE 091 =====
1849 Lonely Evening - Wolves Page 91
Nov. 1 of bitter dry weed, I believe in my soul the poor creature
. Knew me for he turned towards me & approached & as he had
often done in the days of his Glory held forward his gentle
head for me to pat & fondle I examined it carefully & then
step'd round to drive him onward, but horrible! his thighs
& legs were fearfully torn & lacerated. already had the
merciless & hungry Wolves commenced the work of destruction
& poor Tom was doomed to end his short career probAbly long
before tomorrows morning. I turned & left him with a per.
fect sickness of heart I truly believe I Never had felt be-
fore, as long as the road gave me a view of him, I often
turned round & still poor Tom was standing there gazing
after my retreating figure - the Remainder of that days
Journey was a most sorrowful one I could not get the
thoughts of Tom out of my head, in fancy I seen the first
solitary wolf steal close up to him when the shades of even-
ing began to thicken & give his long peculiar whine when
game or Prey can be run down. then the answering call from
Hill to Hill & all over the plaine. they soon collect in
hundreds, poor Tom looks round in Terror but no help is
nigh, the cold sweat stands on his haggard forehead but
boldly & bravely he braces his worn down frame for the
deathly struggle but alas his Enemies are too numerous
front, Rear sides & all are attacked at the seme minute &
soon poor Tom falls & is almost instantly torn in pieces &
swallowed whilst yet quivering & scarcely dead ~ The Evening
began to blow cold & heavy rain descended no wagons were in
. sight, I began to think it full time to look out for some
protection against the storm for the night, but could find
nothing better than a large & branching Mezquite Tree under
whose, low branches I contrived to crawl & scrape away @ place
to lye down, I then collected all the loose sticks around &
made a fire, went to the nearest slough & filled my tin cup
with water placed it on the fire & put my coffee into it,
determined to have a strong cup by way of helping me to pass
a Greary night in this lonely abode, it was soon boiled &
cooled & I prepared to eat my dry Biscuit & drink my strong
cup of coffee, but Oh! misery, it was perfectly salt, I having
diped my cup of water from one of those salt marshes so Coniin
on the Gila, Well, well, I eat my dry bread & wished for
better times. I now began to think of my safety against
Wolves, Indians ete of the latter I was not afraid but the
former required some precaution, I cut a few long sticks &
Kept one end of them still burning in the fire so that at any
: time I would have 4 fine brand to fight them with, I dozed
over my fire as well as the cold would permit me & by keeping
Nep close I recd considerable warmth from his Hairy covering
/ in this way the tedious hours of the Night wore along & I
was @ Kind of half asleep when a most tremendeous yell broke
close beside me & some 50 or 60 wolves in full ery rushed
close past, I thought I was lost, but I was not the object.
Something a few yards in advanee appeared to be the devoted
/ victim & on they rushed untils all were past & I had time
to breathe freely once more, there I stood with a fire

===== PAGE 092 =====
1849 Arrive at the Wagons - Proceed with Page 92
my 4 quadrupeds
Nov. 1 brand in each hand but I threw them down & placed more
wood on my fire & wished for day. At last it came & a
more sorrowful day or uncomfortable night I hope never
again to pass. 355 miles,

2 I ascended the Hill and looked all around, no wagons
in sight, I had no coffee having lost all of that delight-
ful beverage by the salt water so on I determined to pro-
ceed, the day became fine & with the mornings sun all
nature looked as bright as it was possible to do where

: nothing was to be seen but barren mountains, desolate
plains & sandy deserts, TI had not proceeded more than
two miles when I came on the bones of a fresh Killed Deer
& no doubt remained in my mind but he was the victim of
last nights pursuit. In travelling about another mile I
came in sight of the Wagons who were Just yoking up the
cattle. I was in good time to get a comfortable warm
preakfast & the congratulations of my fellow travellers
& soon all the dreary desolate feelings of last night
were obliterated & I once more found my self amongst
busy men & something to occupy myself. I yoked up my
faithful wheelers to my now abreviated wagon & driving
the lone "Lion" along proceeded our way still down
through deep sandy light clay. 10 miles,

3 road as usual but the days were now fine & much
tempered since the fell of rain, my load was rather
heavy for one yoke of oxen but they were a noble pair
& exerted every nerve to pull my Cerrata through the
deep sand & smothering dust, the feed was bad seldome
better than a few bitter willows & cotton wood oc€as-
sionally we found a few Canes which were not entirely
picked beare of their leaves by the numerous trains which
had passed, I had still a little Corn & a few Beans &
taking the coffee mill I ground them together & gave them
a mouthful morning & Evening. You may say this was 4
sméil Business & so it was but I wished to make the most
of what little feed I hed & by grinding it went somewhat
further, Just think of the Idea of Grinding Corn & Beans
in a Coffee mill for Oxen, but I would have done more
than that for my poor faithful servants. it certainly
was & poor pittance for such large animels, My quadrupeds
were now reduced to 4 that is Rob & Bright in the yoke,
Lion walking loose & Nep the ever faithful Nep running
every place & doing all the good he could = my lone ox

, was just skin & Bone & them in yoke not much better
it looked somewhat doubtful getting through with my
Cloathing ete. but for so far I never looked at the dark
side of the picture - the evenings were now clear & cool
& stretched beside my Carrata & the starry Heavens for a ~
Canopy I slept sound after my days fatigue of walking
& driving through deep sand. 11 miles,

4 Sunday remained all day in camp & our cattle con-~
trived to pick up sufficient to fill themselves the day
was mostly spent in cleaning offthe accumulated dust &
Bathing, Washing etc

5 Continued through very deep heavy sand & quite anumber
of the oxen gave out from sheer exhaustion & were left to

: eir unfortunate fate, I have counted as many as twenty dead

===== PAGE 093 =====
1849 Dead Cattle ete ~- Beaver Page 93

Nov. 5 oxen & mules in one fourth the distance say in 5 miles.
All this road is strewn with dead animals & not a few
graves quite a number have been passed the names I
entered on a slip of paper at the time but have since
lost it & what appeared strange to me was that they are
all buried down in the low ground where some of them will
be covered in high water at least ten feet. 10m,

6 the distant mountains present great variety in their
figures all sorts of buildings being easily formed by
their various summits although the material is still the
same naked sand stone etc. the days now present the most
lovely sky & pure Atmosphere if it was not for the eter-
nal dust & sand & scantiness of grass, the bold scenery &
clear sky would be quite charming, but every movement &
step raises such a suffocating dust & such density of
floating pulvarized earth as you might suppose would
resemble the front furnace of a Steam Boat when the fires
are pulled out on the hearth & fifty Buckets of water
poured on them in an instant, 9 m,

7 we started before day with the expectation of reach-
ing the Ferry near the Junction of the Gila with the Color-
ado, the day was as usual very fine & the nights cool &
bright. when lying awake at night on the Rivers Bank I am
often much pleased with the noise or rather musical tones

. of the Beaver it resembles the cooing of the Dove but
somewhat loudef, I have frequently sat for hours watching
them playing & sporting in the water they splash through
it like a set of school Boys taking a holiday Bathe, this
River must present great attractions for the trapper as
traces of the Beaver are every where to be found trees are
cut down in all directions the young willows more particu-~
larly/it appears the favorite tree, towards noon we were
fairly surrounded by Indians galloping & carroliffing round
us on their fine little & symetrical nags, but none of which
could we purchase, we now Knew that we were in the vicinity
of the ferry as those Indians (The Yumahs) have a small vil-
lage near the mouth of the Gila Mexicans were meeting us in
numbers, I stored counted 158 Pack Horses & mules they
were a curious motley assemblage returning from California
whether drove off by the American Government or that their
avarice was satisfied with gold I could not learn but I
believe the former was the case, when we came on the Banks
of the Colorado the scene was a Strange one, some one or
two hundred Mexicans with a few females, their mules,
Horses,Boross (Asses) Packages etc, nearly an equal number
of Indians, their various dresses & some no dress at ail,
the different Emigrants with their wagons & oxen & the fifty
soldiers quartered here sprinkled amongst the whole rendered
the Entire picture quite @ piquant dish for an Epicure
painter. the costume of the female Indians would have put
to Blush the best Bustled young Bell who ever graced a Ball
Room it consisted of a Kind of short petticoat something
like a Gunny Bag tied round the loins & over this bark
pleated in such a number of foulds that both above & below
this wonderful Petticoat they did not present one half the

===== PAGE 094 =====
1849 Distinguished Bell's - Smuggling Page 94
the Precious metals
Nov. 7 thickness. it looked like a strange excressfince placed
on @ neat pair of ped&stals & Ionic top. where the duce
they obtained the fashion from I Know not as I believe
not one of the whole tribe ever seen such & production
as the Ladys Book or any other Book of Fashions but the
Book of nature & let me say it that not the most mincing
or finical walking young Lady that ever promonaded_ Broad-
way or Chesnut Street could equal those Dusky Bel¥ in
the Swing, ‘strut & Wriggle of this Brief & mysterious
Petticoat, the day was spent in purchasing water melons,
pumkins etc & making preparations for crossing on the
Morrow. the width of the River at the ferry is about
200 yards & a pretty good Boat sufficiently large to
carry a wagon is now at this place, it was built up the
Gila by a Mr. Moore & sold to the Lieut commanding at
this place "Camp Calhoun" the ferriage is 4$ for each.
wagon & 50% for a footman, the Mexicans are charged 4%
per mule & 5 per cent on all the amt. of Ore which is now
considerable, some days as much as 50 lb or 60 lb paying
duty, they have recourse to various meathods for the
purpose of smuggling & avoiding the duty, but there is
a serdant, an Irishman, who appears rather Keen & acute
_ for the Mexicans & certainly he has found some of the ore
secreated in places that but few would have thought of in-
specting. all smuggled ore is liable to confiscation but
in general they only take about, half,a portion of which
falls to the indefatigable sergant,& if this constant
stream of the pure metals continues to flow from Cali-
fornja to Mexico by way of the ferry at Camp Calhoun & the
Sergant retains the office of inspector general he is in a
rapid Road to promotion so far as wealth is concerned = [I
witnessed some pieces of pure Gold as large as seven
pounds, the amount daily passing here exceeds all belief &
I would be loath to state the full amount least my friends
who put the most implicit confidence in my veracity might
now be inclined to doubt it, but no doubt long ere this
they have heard more wonderful accounts than I could com-
municate to them, of which facts I am unable to Judge as
it is now almost seven months since we have seen a news-
paper & consequently can form no Idea of what is &
transacting in the busy World - I ascended the Hill or :
Rocks which here form the ramparts of the Rio Colorado
they are about 100 feet high & the view was extended &
beautiful, the distant Mountains presenting every out—
line that it was possible for rugged, piked, precipit-
uous, broken Mountains to assume, spires & domes of
huge & colossal dimensions could easily be distinguished
against the Glowing warm sky of one of the most serene
Evenings, it was possible to immagine, ItAly itself
cannot exceed in & sweet balmy atmosphere this delight-
ful season on the Rio Colorado, but then the continued
clouds of dust our toilsome tedious & everlasting Journey
unfit us for either the beauties of nature or looking
with an eye to Hither the sublime or Beautiful -

===== PAGE 095 =====
1849 Picture of Crossing the Rio Colorado - Page 95
Valuable Books to Enlighten the Yumahs

Nov, 8 the morning was charming & the scene one of the
most strange & picturesque I had ever Witnessed — in my
possession at home were some beautiful pictures of the
Crossing the Jordan but here was a living picture in-
finitely more strange & picturesque - about 150 Mexicans
had arrived on the other side from California with their
Horses, Asses, Mules, Goats & sheep & on this side were
Fumigrants with Wagons & Mules, Oxen & Horses, Indians
& @ sprinkling of soldiers, the Braying of Mules & Boros
Neighing of Horses, Lowing of Oxen Bleating of Goats &
sheep & Yelling & Whooping of the Yumahs with the sup-
pressed & sometimes loud Execrations of the Boatmen
formed a rare picture both for the Eye & Ear, the naked
Barren Rocks & Hills contrasted well with the deep green
of the cotton wood & the soft Bright sky overhead
rendered it such a morning as I shail not soon forget.
the wagons were all safely across by noon & Mr. Porter &
self having only two Carratas we ferried them over in a
small Boat belonging to some Emmigrants & so saved 3¢#
Each we drove out about three miles & camped in the old
bed of the Colorado where our cattle found some little
scattering Cane & under the Mezquite Trees considerable
Reans,

9 this day was devoted to Razeging the wagons still
more & making prepArations for crossing the great Amer-
ican Desert. Mr. Crandell who had started with three
wagons & had added another to them on the way now reduced
ali down to 3/4 of one wagon & a cerrata & in fact this
was only a fair sample of the way that all the Rest had
done. for my own part the once fine & stately looking
"Succor State" was reduced to a "Carrata" of whitch I was
the irresponsible controller, The Mezquite tree
resembles a large old Apple tree which had never been
incommoded by the pruning knife only that in leaves &
thorns the Locust would be the better simile Under
this almost impervious spreading thorny tree were the
Beans & the great difficulty was to obtain them without
loss of skin & blood but that was impossible & I lost
poth but received quite a number of thorns in exchange.
some of the Beans are long & flat others spiral & in
small Bunches the latter are called Screw Beans the
others flat both are very sweet & contain a great deal
of Sacharine matter,

10 Still continued gathering Beans but no persuasion
or presents could tempt the Indians to gather any for us.
riding about their handsome fat Horses & painting then-
selves all sorts of h¢dious colors appears to be their
chief end & existance, but we have left them some valuable
works on e@lmost all subjects, Political economy, Physio-
logy, Law, Physics & divinity. Amongst the miscellaneous
productions that were not considered absolutely neces~
sary for the support of our Earthly Tabernacle agcross
the Desert, I noticed 5 large volumes of Tuckers Black
sponte, titty or sixty Religious tracts on all the sins

8 es S prone t ortion
of novels amonges which’ pate oe Hien tale Phere not
the least numerous, If the Indians are not enlightened

===== PAGE 096 =====
1849 Money not appreciated by the Indians Page 96

Nov, 10 from this Period forward they certainly cannot blame
the emigrants, Congressionel Documents were left in
piles, all the late Treaties with Mexico will now be-
come quite familiar to the Yumah & the aspiring Candi-
date for the Presidential Chair may here safely calcul-
ate on the vote of the whole tribe if he only pursues
a liberal policy towards,,their Nation by permitting
them to Rob & scalp all Mexicans & the few defenceless
Emigrants who may be possessed of Horses, Mules or
Oxen, or any other article which might suit their fancy.
But I presume all such works will be considered beneath
their notice & a few strings of Blue glass beads would
pe preferred to the Wagons, Chairs, Boxes, Trunks, Books
& the thousands of other articles left here. Money,
they have little or no Idea of its value & will ask a
dollar for a water melon & if offered 5 cents will take
it for the same article. I seen one man give a dollar
for an axe handle another gave @ Dollar for a few
Inches of ribbon which pleased his fancy, when at the
same time he would probibly offer you 10 cents for a
new shirt or Coat - they go almost entirely naked
except the Breach Cloath & whatever they may have
obtained from the Emigrants, the Females only wear
the short Petticoat of Bark, both sexes are fat,healthy
looking & well formed & in generel the men have fine
noble looking heads, the females have the Under lip
all tattoed, in general four Blue stripes run from the
mouth down over the Chin & they present somewhat the
apoearance that a youngster would that had her mouth
full & running over with Molasses Candy.

LL Sunday Mess. Phillips, Armstrong & Rankin arrived
& the boat had also safely landed, but as they intended
to get rid of a portion of their extra loading & also
to gather beans they would remain a few days longer &
also follow the example of the others by razgeaing their
wagons & leaving a little more valuable Li trature for
the benighted Yumahs,

12 the day was pretty far advanced before we found
all our cattle & started, the road led through deep
smothering dust a few scattered MeZquite trees
skirted the road & tall weeds Kept the least air of
wind from reaching us, so that we received the full
penefit of the suffocating atmosphere. at night we
camped on the rivers Bank, 10m,

15. the soldiers from Camp Calhoun Exhumed their
014 capt. this morning who had been burried here a few
days having been unfortunately drowned at the Ferry and
his Body found down at this place, it was sent off to
San Diego, previous to being returned to the U.S. to
his friends — his name was Thopne - the day was windy
& heavy gusts of Rain would ocAssionally dash in our
faces but all was unable to lay the deep dust which
rose at every step of the heavy oxen & fairly
enveloped us in clouds, as the road or track
through which we wound was, lined with tall weeds
10 to 15 feet high & affored a fine ally

===== PAGE 097 =====
1849 An Unknown tribe Page 97

Nov. 13 through which the wind whirled & whisked the impal-
pable volumes all around us, our appearance was quite
interesting & certainly unique. we bore a close, resem-
plance to those modest & retiring animals who ocassion-
ally emerge from the bed of some muddy creek to take a
noon tide siesta on a convenient Log. it would have been
a perfect puzzle to the oldest trapper to have designated
to which tribe we belonged. as it never would once
have entered his head that we were white men, Indeed
our habiliments & faces whould have put that Idea to
route, to the Yumahs we certainly did not belong as
those interesting Gents generally painted the face Black
with a red Stripe from the Center of the forehead down
over the nose & chin. our faces had various Longitudinal
furrows down from the Eyes as an ocaskional perverse
particle of dust would enter that sensative organ & cause
it to drop a tear for our forlorne situation, Towards
noon we entered an Indian settlement some 3 or 4 miles
long, they have good fields of pumpkins & water melons,
peas,Beans etc, but their Wigwams or huts if they deserve
even that name are hardly a shelter against the wind,
They consist mearly of a few Willows stuck in the ground
& very imperfectly secured or covered, at almost every
hut stood a beautiful sleek fat Horse picketed down Arab
fashion, all ready for sable master to mount & scamoer
across the plains either in pursuit of an Enemy or to
carry him safe frome one ~ I was driving in the rear of
the train, when a young Indian came up to me smiling in
the most good humored manner & tendered his hand, at the
same time accosting me with "how do you do God Damn you"
the salutation was rather a strange one & notwithstanding
the denounciatory tenor of the latter part of it, I
extended my hand & received & warm shake - they are quite
apt scholars & no doubt this youth had acquired this
ohrase from some of the recent travellers & appeared very
proud of his acquirement in the English Language. Another
young Indian now came up & held out 8 silver Dollars say-~
ing he wanted a serapspa. I showed him the few I had for
disposal but none of them vleased him. he wanted a red
one, I had none of the color. my acquaintance of the
warm salutation had retired to the rear of the Carrata
during the time I was trying to negociate a sale of the
Blankets & young Mr. Howlitt who had remained with me dis-
covered him covering something up in the Cart Rut which on
examination I found to contain all the Knives,Forks &
Spoons of our Mess, what possible use an Indian could
make of Forks is somewhat of a me ery: I got out my
double Barrel shot Gun when Mr, Ladrone vamosed in double
guick but soon returned smiling & Laughing considering it
no doubt a very fine Joke & we once more shook hands some-
thing like a pair of Boxers previous to a set to for the
purpose of making the spectators believe that they are
best friends in the world, but I must say that my confi-
dence was considerably lessened & no doubt had he been

===== PAGE 098 =====
1849 Gather Me&quite Beans ~ Enter on the Page 98
‘Great Desert

Nov, 13 aware of the meaning of the last clause in his address
would have wished it lit*erally fulfilled, I suppose
his companion was aware of the weakness of the pale
Faces for the precious metals & in this way amused me
whilst his Friend was abstracting what few articles he
could conveniently find in the Box at the end of the
Caratta —~ we camped without water amongst Mezquite Trees
where considerable beans were found. 11 miles.

14 all hands were early out gathering Beans as they
were the only sustenance we had to depend on in crossing
the Great Desert. the Indians depend in a great measure
on them, when pounded they yield a very sweet meal,
large piles of them were collected for their winter pro-
vision & T have no doubt but some of the Boys discovered
them as they returned to Camp with well filled Bags in
a most increadible short space of time, the day was
pretty well advanced before we got off as our cattle
hed strayed & scattered to a great distance in fact some
were lost Mr, Porter left a fine Ox after searching
almost the entire day. It was said there was a well
about 8 miles on the way which we reached shortly after
dark & found a little muddy water as the rain of the
preceeding day had partially filled it. this well is
mearly a hole dug in a low part of the plainé which the
continued Emigrants keep dug out as the first heavy rain
sweeps it full of sand, dirt & Dead Animals, numbers of
which are lying all around but no doubt they enrich the
water as both ourselves & cattle used up all that it
contained & still remained far from being satisfied,

10 miles,

15 after travelling through deep sand for five miles
we ascended the elevated plaing with great labor. here
an Immense & extended level lay before us, "the Great
American Desert" bounded in the far distance by naked
Rugged mountains a fit boundery for such a sterile naked
waste the only specimen of the vegetable Kingdom being
the "Larrea Mexicana" from two to four feet high & but
few of them, they were scattered at wide distances
apart & I am not certain that I now give the right name
of the shrub as I know nothing of botdény - our progress
was slow as the wheels sunk deep in the sand & pebbles,
at sunset we halted & fed our cattle & cooked supper &
after two hours rest resumed our Journey the day was
charming, 12 mi,

16 the night was cool & clear as the stars shown out
bright & towards morning we halted to rest both ourselves
& cattle, after tying my oxen I threw myself down on my
Bua rato Robe & slept soundly until& morning when we resumed
of ‘weary way & by 11 0 clock came to where we had a well
designated on our maps (as I had copied some from a map
in possession of the officer at Camp Calhoun) but alas!
it was quite dry, it was an awful looking place. I
counted upwards of fifty dead Mules, Horses & Oxen ~ the

===== PAGE 099 =====
1849 — Lagoons - Dead Cattle - Graves ~ Page 99
Camo Salvation
Nov. 16 Mules & Horses predominating largely over the oxen - but
in fact the Road all the way down the Gila, & for so far
is plentifully strewn with food for buzzards, wolves &
Ravens ~ the latter being the only specimen of life we
have seen since ascending the Bluff, the remains of
Wagons were here in plentiful profusion. when we wished
to Kindle a fire for cooking purgoses a handsome Eastern
built wagon frequently supplied the material, it was no
unusual thing to see a Troy Built Vehicle supply the fuel
for meArly warming up a little cold coffee, "to what
poor uses we may come at last" in two miles further we
came to a Lagoon with an abundance of Stagnant Water
where all were duly refreshed but like the past well
the mortality had been great & not entirely confined to
the cattle as five new Graves were here, one of which
was only three days before from the boards olaced at
the Grave head, they all appeared to have been from
Arkansas, it was evident that the last deceased had
only been in Company with another man as from the place
where he died he had been haWled on a few Bushes to his
grave. his old clothing still remained where he died.
it certainly was a gloomy picture & a dreary resting
place & awful solitude must surround this muddy Lagoon
when the few travellers shall cease to pass by these
Golgothas ~- the road from this place improved & by
9 o clock we reached our camping ground, modestly
called "Salvation Camp" 16 m
17 this camping place is on a low Lagoon & was now
well supplied with stagnant water but as the nights were
very cool it was by no means unpalatable & afforded us
quite a refreshing drink & Bath, an abundance of Grass /
has been here at an earlier period of the season but was
now quite dry however we pulled & Balled a supply or as
much as we could well stow away & permitted our cattle
to range round & enjoy what refreshment the place afforded -
the whole lagoon is a dangerous place for weak cattle &
we had two mired & drowned before we could extricate
them quite a number of them had to be drawn from this
slough, of Despond, Cap. Rogers lost his noble steed
"Charly" in one of those quagmires + the gallant Fellow
had nobly borne his master foremost in many a hard chase
after the Buffalo on the banks of the Arkansas, but now
left his bones to bleach on the great Desert - he might
almost say with Fitzjames "Woe worth the Chase - Woe
worth the day, that cost thy life my Gallant Bay, I
little thought that Desert Buzzard ere should feed, on
thy fleet limbs my Bonny Steed" ~ but so it is the poor
faithful slaves that have ministered daily to our
pleasures since we left the states are now almost hourly
dropping off & abandoned & we are unable to afford them
the least asistance, Starvation & toil are rapidly
thinning the number,
18 Sunday Charming clear day in fact finer weather
: was never enjoyed by travellers the days with few
exceptions are bright warm & sunny, the nights cool &

===== PAGE 100 =====
1849 Beautiful Mirtkage ~ a Group - Page 100
@ Queer Assemblage

Nov, 18 clear, the general temperature pleasent, the day was
occupied in gathering dry grass & preparing for an early
start on the morrow, around this Lagoon a few Mezquite
Trees are scattered & at some seasons it must be a
pleasent place altho on the Desert, quail & small Birds
were plenty, as there is but little here to disturb
them except the Hawk, a company of U.S, troops were
here herding mules & putting up hay they are not much
annoyed by their Neighbors as only the returning Mex-
icans & the progressing Americans visit them,

19 we took an early start over a comparative good
road, bright morning & clear sky in a short distance we
discovered a beautiful Lake of perfectly clear limpid
water, it presented itself in rather an unexpected place
& on looking back we discovered a similar one in our

: rear, it was now evident that those beautiful sheets of
water were only the mirkage the deception was so perfect
that it was with difficulty we could persuade ourselves
that it was not real, we could see the reflection of
those in advance perfectly well defined. some times the
distance was not more than 3 or four hundred yards at
others it would recede to a mile or two, no sight on this
dry desert certainly could have been more pleasing & 80
confident were some.thet the water was real that bets were
made as to its tang&bility one Gent asserted that he
seen the ducks swimming on it, this appeared a clincher,
but both Ducks & Fluid vanished on a nearer approach ~
My leader gave out before night & I was late of getting
into camp, where I found the other wagons corrdéled round
Bright fires on the edge of a small Lagoon. a number of
Mexican soldiers were also camped & coming in. a tribe
of Indians were likewise on this small Lake & with the
Blazing fires shining on their naked & glossy skins the
reflections from Mexican leather caps & our own beautiful
dusty Beards we presented a very varied group, the Mex-
ican wagons with the provisions had not arrived & the
Valiant warriors were short of rations. Mr, Crandell
sold them some Biscuit at 25¢ the tin cup full & Pinola
pretty much the same, some others sold them Bacon at
25¢ lb. the prices to them did not appear exorbitant.
Silver was in hand fulls. 16 miles,

20 Arrivals of Emmigrants, Mexicans & Indians had
been great during the night & this morning when I arose
from my Buffalo Robe beside my Carrata my bed fellows
were of the most mnoathy description. here lay a Mexican
soldier with his Wife. there a huddle of Indians, all
ages sexes & sizes & a little further on a few gold
seekers with their Blue Blankets & comfortable Buffalo
robes. "Nep" ever true Kept close to my side & thus
in a small space on the American Desert slent different
Nations, Languages & colors in perfect amity. during

. the morning some of the Senorahs arrived mounted on their

===== PAGE 101 =====
1849 Mexican Soldiers dress - Page 101
General Conde
Nov, 20 fine California Horses, One fair Lady had her little lap
dog mounted on a neat little cushion at the rear of her
saddle where the snarling little fellow looked down with
utter contempt on all meaner pedestrian curs, those Mex-
ican damsels appear to think nothing of the fatigues of
the desert - well mounted on their fine Nags from Camp tg
Camp only affords them a pleasent excursion, but the co ion
soldiers are withaut exception & most miserable looking
set of Ragged taterdemalions not one in ten can sport
either a pair of shoes or Boots, in Lieu of those useful
articles they generally substitute sandAls, which are
rather a primitive erticle of manufacture being only a
piece of Raw Hide somewhat larger than the sole of the
foot & fastened with a few thongs of the same material,
Stockings I suppose are voted an obstruction in the free
: use of the limbs, & the pants generaly afforded perfect
freedom & ventilation from their width & numerous aper-
tures, the vest would impede free respiration & conse-
quently remained abroad to Keep company with the stock-~
ings. the coat might therefore be considered to resemble
charity by covering a multitude of sins, the Apex of this
composite pile was & small Glazed leather cap with an ex-
ceeding brief front piece insufficient to shade them from
either sun,Wind or rain & by no means obstructed their
Vision & in this it was of infinite service as they could
at all times see the approaching Enemy and make a timely
escape - shortly after starting we met Generel Conde with
the commisariat department about 250 pack mules, heavily
loaded, a few wagons & his state carriege etc, this
latter was a heavy lumbering old rattle trap concern with
six mules attatched to it, escorted by a few varigated
dragoons, some of whome I noticed wore two Hats, ‘a large
straw sombraro next the Head & topped off with a leather
cap. TI have no doubt the whole concern was very imposing
as the Indlans appeared to admire it prodiga&ously, but I
was tired & fatigued driving oxen & had no disposition to
View his Excellancy with admiring Eyes - the evening was
fine & we camped about two hours after dark on dry sandy
plain, 12 miles,
21 A little water was discovered this morning in some
holes to the right of our camp, but little or nothing
for the cattle to eat, We made an early start & in
travelling about 3 miles were hailed by Mr. Crandell
from a sand ridge stating that he had discovered some |
bunch grass in a low plainé, which we drove to & unyoked,
this article called "Bunch grass" bears no resemblance
to any other thing of the Grass Kind I ever saw, it
is coarser than wheat straw & more like shrubbery but
when green the cattle eat it with avidity, as in fact
they are now glad to get any thing to fill their maw with.
we started before sunset, in a short time we met about
one hundred Mexicans mostly gold Diggers returning, their
mules were heavily loaded, principally flour & provisions

===== PAGE 102 =====
1849 Tempting Offer for Nep - Page 102
Carrigo Creek ~ Dead Ass
Nov, 21 of various kinds, our Road led through deep sand hills
& we toiled along until& the moon was setting when we tied
our cattle to the wheels & gave them a little dried Grass,
as it was the only thing we could give them. I threw my-
self down on the sand with my cloak around me & slept
soundly until} morning with the exception of a little dis-
turbance from the MéZquitoes altho this was the morning
of 22 Nov. & both this & the previous night I was badly
merked from their attacks & no doubt had I been less fati-
gued would have suffered considerable by them. so much
for this climate —~ when passing some of General Conde's
train day before yesterdsy my Hat had blown off & I sent
Nep for it, the action & appearance of the dog appeared
to delight them, one of the officers immediately proposed
giving me a mule for him but I declined the offer, I
believe he would have given me two for him but I had no
Inclination to part with such a sincere friend in this far
off & strange Land, but certainly a mule would have been
/ much the most servicable Animal of the two although not
the most faithful & attatched. it ig said that practice
makes perfect but I must say that the continued walking by
no means Improved my Feet as at this time they were rarely
without a Blister, however, they were like the Eels in
the Frying pan "getting used to it" & so they well might
as the distance was something like Three thousand miles.
a pretty considerable overland Journey with an Ox train -
16 miles,
22 fine morning with a few fleeting clouds & as early as
the first dawn made its appearance we were off in about
2 miles we found @ little running water trickling down
‘ the almost dry bed of Corrigo Creek, this was the first
we had seen since leaving the Colorado. the Bed of this
Creek is between two rocky Barren mountains, not a part-
icle of Gress or indeed any thing else with the exception
of the Larrea Mexicana & a few other stunted shrubs ail
in utter desolation. it is impossible to immagine the
complete waste & sterile appearance of those peaked,
Jagged, Pointed, & Hillocky mountains. the Genius of
Bolitude Desolation & Death rains over all here without
controle, let or hinderance once for all. at no time
are you ever out of sight of Dead Mules, Horses, or Oxen
& I have even seen that sight which Mr. Saml Weller con-
sidered problematical - a Dead Ass, that instinctive
pertinacity with which it is said they cling to life was
found here unable to protect them against the desolating
Angel of the Desert, so that long mooted question may now
be set at rest "Asses do die" — as the morning advanced
Livid Clouds began to overshadow the sun & in a short
time fitful gusts of Wind rushed down between the mountains,
then for a moment or two a lull would ensue, but this would
be succeeded by stronger & heavier gusts whirling & dash-
ing the loose sand in our Eyes & completely obstructing

===== PAGE 103 =====
1849 Tempest on the Desert — Page 103
@ Miserable Night

Nov, 22 all view in a short time so severe did the Hurricane
become that we could barely proceed the sand whirled
& Eddied around us filling every opening, Eyes, Ears &
Mouth, all traces of the road were nearly obliterated,
the oxen in their weak state stumbled siowly along & by
holding on to the wagon we continued to dreg our weary
limbs through this simoon of shifting sand. a few yards
at a time was all we could overcome, the wind blew cold
& frosty the sudden change affected us much as we were
not prepared for it & we suffered much from the cold, I
had faced many a storm of Rain, Snow & sleet, but such
severity as this I never encountered we hed two sailors
in company who had battled with many a storm around Cape
Horn had suffered the biting Northern Tempests, the
sudden Tornadoes of southern Latitudes, but this far,
far Exceeded in real suffering any trials to which they
had ever been exposed, during one of the short rests
with which we had to indulge our weary oxen I seated my~
self on the skeleton of a dead mule as such seats were
always in ebundance & in that short oeriod my seat was
entirely covered up with the drifting sand ~ we continued
our slow & toilsome way until near dark & driving as
close under a Bluff as possible unyoked our almost ex-
hausted cattle tied them to the wheels & gave them part
of what little dry grasa remained. a fire was coaxed
into existance with what few shrubs could be obtained
a little Warm coffee without sugar (as that useful art-
icle had for a length of time been unknown to us) & some
cold cakes constituted our disconsolate supper, which .
was certainly the most dreary on the whole Journey & I
rather think it would be difficult to picture 4 more
dreary one, surrounded by naked barren mountains, &
sandy sterile plains, not a tree or shrub of any magni-
tude to afford us a comfortable fire, sitting freezing
over & nearly cold supper, the only warm article of it
peing the sugarless coffee, but as a substitute well
filled with the drifting & Eddying sand of the Great
American Desert. I made my bed close to the carrata
& passed a cold & almost sleepless Night, 7 miles,

23 we arose about two o'clock & yoked up. the wind
still continued cold we had almost been covered up with
the drifting sand during the night our Blankets were com-
pletely filled with it. by Day light it moderated & the
sun shown out clear but still cold the change was a for-
tunate one for us for had the tempest continued the desert
would have been the last resting place of our hungry
cattle & probbly some of ourselves would have remained to
Keep them Comoany. the road led up the bed of this dry
Creek (Carriza) it was pure clean deep sand & exceedingly
difficult for wearied oxen, numbers of which were now
dropping down to rise no more, My own team was still
enabled to proceed as I had a little meal for them once

===== PAGE 104 =====
1849 Exhausted cattle - Indians - Page 104
War — Valliceto
Nov. 23 a day about 14 pints each - every effort were had re-
sourse to to make the poor exhausted Brutes proceed. the
most effectual was to run up at them with the dog when if
they still possess strength to resume their feet they
would at once do so. near one of the Lagoons which we
had past were two poor exhausted oxen & I used all my
power to persuade them to rise for the purpose of driving
them to water but I could not move them, at last I set
Nep on them one of the poor feeble animals with great
exertion resumed his feet & stumbled forward a few paces
when he once more fell,to never rise again, I was sorry
I had disturbed the dying creature as he fell in a worse
position than I found him, a few Indian families are
found at or near all those Lagoons as I conceive for the
purpose of getting the exhausted Mules, horses & oxen
all of which are stripped of what little flesh hard usage
has left. in general those Indians look fat & Hearty as
every weed or shrub appears to afford them food in some
shape or other however even on those lonely Deserts
their love of war and fighting appears to cling to them,
at one of their shelters we found a man who had been
way leid & shot in the Breast by an arrow he was not
: quite dead & Mr, Crandell bound up his wound, three or
four Squaws were keeping up @ wonderful wailing around
him, the deed was done by the Yumas three of whoma we
met returning to thelr village on the Colorado. in my
Early day I had often admired the heroic & daring con-
duct described by some writers respecting the patient
tollsome marches made into an Enemys country by some
young Chief anxious to distinguish himself & the noble
bravery with which he had taken possession of some half
dozen scalps. TI am now sorry to say that all the romance
of the transaction has changed into detestation of their
assassin like acts, but different nations have different
Ideas of Glory & probAbly the Indians method of destroying
his Enemy, may be as justifiable before an higher tribunal
as our own more wholesale & scientific plan of sweeping
them off by thousands. a little before sunset we reached
the spring of Valliceto. its situation is between to
Barren mountains about 14 miles apart & for a short dis-
tance around has had good grass but all is now eaten off
& the place resembles a Coméns, the soring is strongly
impregnated with sulpher & “he ground covered with
Eftlovgnee. it was rather a poor resting place but we
were glad to obtain any thing in the shape of food for
our cattle & a few Bitter Willows still remained on
which they Browsed, 11 miles.
24 it was late in the day before we gathered up our
: cattle as they had strayed unsuccessfully in quest of
petter boarding, the road led up between the two mountains
which were in some places 5 or 6 miles apart, in about
4 miles we came to a very steep hill which we had to cross
it was some 4 or 5 hundred feet high & the most abrupt
which we had found on our Journey but we all got safe over
& found water at a spring El Puerto (or the Door) this

===== PAGE 105 =====
1849 Enter El Puerto — San Filipe - Page 105
Preparation for Separation

Nov. 24 Vally was about two hundred feet higher than the one
which we had left, they are strange little secluded
places, no outlet, hills or mountains all around. no
running water, no trees only a few shrubs nevertheless
here were a few Indian Families at this spring as were
also a few at the last ~- they were now beginning to

, Build their Huts as the nights were getting very cold
& ice forming every night. previous to this, the
shelter of the few bushes or the sand hills afforded
them the only protection against the weather. we pro-
ceeded on a few miles & let our cattle loose on the
poorest possible Kind of poor shrubs. 7 miles,

25 Sunday, we were early off & our way led up a

Canp the most strange & wild egress from this forlorn
val. steep hills arose over our heads,naked & barren
& the Wagon filled up the whole breadth between the
rocks, so completely did they fit this narrow defile
that both sides were frequently rubbing at the same
time, it was the gry place that perfectly came up
to my Ideas of a Kanyon, with much toil we gained the
summit & by a gentle descent on a good road gained the
next vate = here we met a large party of Mexicans who
were Vamosing from California in all haste. as usual
with lots of Ora - Towards noon we reached San Filipe.
it contains about 50 Indian Huts which were new as their
prepdrations for Winter were in rapid progress - @ round

: hole is scooped out in the sand & a few sticks stuck
around it meeting at top & a covering of Brush & another
of sand generally constitute the Edefice. it is about
10 or 12 feet in diameter & five or six high in the
center, the door or hole at which they enter about
30 inches high. it affords them shelter for one Winter
& I believe that is as long as ae generality of Indians
wish to provide against or prep for. like the
springs lately passed, this is strongly sulphurated &
an Effle@resence covers the Ground the grass adjoining
is salt but further down the vally it was free from
saline matter & we drove about two miles below the
Village & Camped near a few 014 Cotton-Wood Trees the
first we had seen for a long time. 135 m,

26 remained in camp & during the day made prepArations |
for seperating, as part of the Company Concluded to go
to Los Angels & part to San Diego. the Nights now were
cold & heavy frosts but the days clear & dry Towards
evening a spring of better water was discovered near
the mountain, where we drove our cattle & they once
more had a good drink,

27 last night was cold & frosty today clear, a few

: : of us visited the Indian Town, they are a healthy fine
Specimen of the California race, speak a little Mexican
Spanish so that we could make ourselves understood.
they dress better than any other Indians we have seen
e

===== PAGE 106 =====
1849 Indian Gambéiling ~- Warners Ranch Page 106
Nov, 27 lately. that is they have more dress on them, the
females have nearly all Chimeses & petticoats & the men
: serappas, so that we concluded they were in a high state
of civilization, they possess much more Vivacity than
any tribe we had seen - the men were mostly all gambling
or spectators ~ the game was a new one to me, they had
four small pieces of Cane, 3 inches long & + of an inch
with one side of each piece was marked with some h¢fo-
glyphic., the other side free from mark the antagonists
sat 4 feet apart, each having a small flat stone on
. which he struck the canes on the end and projected them
towards his opponent then according to the side of the
cane which was turned up & the mark on it, his success
or defeat depended, a marking Board lay at hand with a
number of holes round the edge & on this board the game
. was Kept with two stones one Black & other White, the
. length of each game appeared about from 10 to 15 minutes,
considerable silver was deposited, washing & every
prepération for the Sea Coast was carried on. old shoes
Soled, Kneeless pants made to look almost as good as
new ete. Elbows once more covered & in fact we prepared
to atart well protected against the Inclemency of the
Season after a land toil of Eight months, .
28 last night was cold & Stormy, our start was an
Early one the road leading up a gentle eminence, the
wind was directly in our faces & the cold rain was any
thing but agreeable & our long usage to heat & dust
made it orobably more so than it otherwise would have
been. the ascent continued more steep & by noon we had
‘ ascen@ed ee mountain which led us down into the far
famed Vally of Warners ranch, we camped within two
miles of it. a few of us visited the place after
supper. it was mearl¥y a Willow frame house with flags
for roof & sides about 50 or 60 feet long & twenty
wide,some 15 feet high. however this wag a new concern
the old Ranch being three miles farther north. we gained
but little information as respected the digging gold,
: . but he was like all the Mexicans whom& we had met, he
; said that it was impossible to go into the mines during
the Winter. Here we determined to divide our Company
once more the Mess, Porters & Howlet going to Los
Angels & Mr, Crandle & his men & the two Miller Boys &
/ self ‘going to San Diego, it was with much regret I had
determined to part with Dr, Porter & his Brothers, but
/ we all considered the sepAration best adapted to the
respective wants & wishes of the parties, 16 miles,
29 a few minutes previous to our visit to Warner's
Ranch an Indian had been shot it seems two of them
had been successively snapping a loaded pistol at each
other not Knowing it to be loaded & it went off and
blew one of their heads to pleces, it created little
sensation. This morning we shook hands & parted from
our old friends, the day was gloomy & the tops of the

===== PAGE 107 =====
1849 Killing a Wolf - Station Isabella Page 107
Nov, 29 mountains covered with snow, every thing looked dreary
& bleak but in an hour or two the sun broke through the
Clouds & Cheerafulness began to r&in once more as we
gained the next vally. the meadow Larks were singing
Joyously & everything began to have the appearance of a
Spring morning. our spirits rose with the cheererfull
shining sun & we forgot that we had passed a cold damp
night, at noon a prowling wolf approached rather near
where we sat taking our lunch & Mr. Oakley fired at him
& broke his leg. "Nep" soon caught him & they had a
real rough & tumble fight. the wolf came off second
pest - near evening we entered the fine Val of "Sta-
tion Isabell" it is a most charming place, large herds
of horses & cattle were quietly grazing in its rich
pastures for here the grass was tall & Green. numerous
clear streams flow through one of them sufficiently
Large for any modpate power, the old buildings are all
going to decay the roof of the Church has fallen in,
put the Bells still remain, quite a village is built
around the old Ruins, Consisting of Mexicans Indians &
the intermediate grades, but if the Vall was a lovely
“scene of quiet repose the Village was the reverse,
a quantity of the ardent had found its way here from
San Diego & a regular Do#ny Brook fair was in full
blast, only the shillelehs were represented by Knives,
Lances, Bows & Arrows etc the Gentlemen were rather
darker in the complexion & generally sans coullote
one Gentleman had his head laid open in the most Scien-
: tific manner, at first I thought he had a profusion of
. Vermillion plastered over his face & hair but on closer
inspection discovered that it was blood all those
Indians will tell you that they are American, no Mexi-
eanos, they appear particularly eax one to impress on
your mind that they have thrown all allSgance to Mexico
off with their last old serappa, 15 miles,

30 An early start. led ug over some rough mountain
scenery but the day was fine. the Grass Green & the
Meadow larks singing all around, it presented more the
appearance of an April or May morning than the last of
Nov. by 20 clock we entered the rich Vally of Station
Maria, herds of Cattle & Horses were quietly pasturing.
the only remains of the former Gr&teness of this place
is a fine well walled round & the residence of the
present proprietor rather a comon adobse House covered
in @ great measure with dried Hides, the old Gentleman
is very liberal & for a few pieces Tobacco he gave us
two fine rounds of Beef newly Killed which proved quite
a treat & gave us a few delicious meals, the Indians

: carried away the entire offal. not one particle of the
animal remaining we camped a short distance from the
house, 14 miles.

Dee.1 our Road today was over the most mountainous part
of all our Journey. this portion of the Cordelleries is
very broken & of course the roads have never been much
improved by art. occassionally all our forces were

===== PAGE 108 =====
1849 Station San Diego - Mission San Diego Page 108

Dec, 1 required to Keep one Wagon from oversetting such sidling
& precipitous noes I think have rarely been travelled
by wheeled Veichls ~ I ascended one of the mountains &
obtained a fine’view of the Pacific Ocean, there it lay
in quiet Majesty but no Vessels in View. The highest
peaks of the Cordelleries were this day passed about
3000 feet above the Ocean & at Evening we camped at the
Mission San Diego only some few feet above the sea,
vast fields of beautiful Oats lay all along the moun-
tains finer than any I had ever seen, better than any
cultivated on those our cattle fed with much relish,

2 this morning I examined the old Mission of San
Diego. it is a splendid establishment or has been one
as it is now rather falling into ruins, the principle
Building is supported by fifteen square pillars and
ranges with the Church which has also three more making
a peautiful front. on a fine elevation which overlooks
an extensive Garden of some fifteen or twenty acaraXes
enclosed with a high Adob&e Wall. two magnificent Palm
trees are the first thing which strikes the attention
of the traveller, next the great quantity of olive
Trees all loaded with the beautiful fruit. hundreds of
Bushels hang most temptingly but alas the taste is by
no means equal to their appearance. Old Grape Vines
are numerous every indication shows that immense
labor & expené’e have been bestowed on this extensive
Mission, a large Kind of Cactus are planted around
the Walls, said to have been fetched from Mexico, Some
of the fruit were still on them & I considered them a
great delicacy. the Church is in good order & contains
many fine paintings and all this splendid place is
entirely deserted except when a few emigrants make it a
temp@érary home, & their stay by no means help to improve
the concern —

3 we drove down to San Diego distance 6 miles
it is a small place,. at present garrisoned with a small
company of U. S&S, troops. the temprature of the day was
summer & altho a little Adobe Towd every thing looked
cheersful, the Mexicans Galloping & officers parading,
senorettas with gay dresses ete with the bright sun
overhead contributed to make it rather

===== PAGE 109 =====
Arrived at the Town of San Diego 3rd
Dec, 1849, Day pleasent and warm, Meadow
Larks singing and flowers in bloom. The
vast and majestic Ocean in quiet repose and
411 nature in one of her most joyous and
smiling moods, On the morning of the 4th,
however, a change had come over the spirit
of the dream -- cold and fitful gusts of
wind rushed down from the rugged Gold --~-
: Left San Diego 20 December 1849, Arrived
: at San Francisco 12 January 1850.

